Al Gore’s Science Fiction
A Skeptic’s Guide to An Inconvenient Truth
By Mario Lewis, Jr.

Executive Summary

An Inconvenient Truth (AIT), Vice President Al Gore’s book on “The planetary emergency of global
warming and what can be done about it,” purports to be a non-partisan, non-ideological exposition
of climate science and moral common-sense. In reality, AIT is a colorfully illustrated lawyer’s brief
for global warming alarmism and energy rationing. It is a j’accuse hurled at fossil-energy-based
civilization, especially the USA, and above all the Bush Administration and its allies in the U.S. oil
and auto industries.
We do not expect lawyers to argue both for and against their clients, nor do we expect balance from
party men. However, although Gore reminds us (in the film version of AIT) that he “used to be the
next President of the United States,” and concludes the book and film with a call for “political
action,” he presents AIT as the work of a long-time student of climate science—and a product of
meditation on “what matters.” He thus asks us to expect more from him than the mere cleverness
that can sway juries or win elections.
This reasonable expectation is unmet. In AIT, the only facts and studies considered are those
convenient to Gore’s scare-them-green agenda. And in many instances, Gore distorts the evidence
he cites.
The present paper, a running commentary on AIT, finds that most of Gore’s claims regarding
climate science and climate policy are either one sided, misleading, exaggerated, speculative, or
wrong. An extensive summary of AIT’s distortions is provided in Appendix A. Below is a list of 25
of egregious examples.
One-sided statements
•

•
•
•

•

AIT never acknowledges the indispensable role of fossil fuels in alleviating hunger and poverty,
extending human life spans, and democratizing consumer goods, literacy, leisure, and personal
mobility.
It never acknowledges the environmental, health, and economic benefits of climatic warmth and
the ongoing rise in the air’s CO2 content.
It neglects to mention that aggregate mortality and mortality rates due to extreme weather
events declined dramatically during the 20th century.
It neglects to mention the circumstances that make it reasonable rather than blameworthy for
America to be the biggest CO2 emitter: the world’s largest economy, abundant fossil energy
resources, markets integrated across continental distances, and the world’s most mobile
population.
The book impugns the motives of so-called global warming skeptics but never acknowledges the
special-interest motivations of those whose research grants, direct mail income, industrial policy
privileges, carbon trading commissions, regulatory power, prosecutorial plunder, or political
careers depend on keeping the public in a state of fear about global warming.

  

1

•

AIT never addresses the obvious criticism that the Kyoto Protocol is all economic pain for no
environmental gain and that regulations stringent enough to measurably cool the planet would
be a “cure” worse than the alleged disease.

Misleading statements
•

•
•

•

AIT implies that, throughout the past 650,000 years, changes in CO2 levels preceded and largely
caused changes in global temperature, whereas the causality mostly runs the other way: CO2
changes followed global temperature changes by hundreds to thousands of years.
It ignores the societal factors that typically overwhelm climatic factors in determining people’s
risk of damage or death from hurricanes, floods, drought, tornadoes, wildfires, and disease.
It erroneously implies that a study, which found that none of 928 science articles (actually
abstracts) denied a CO2-global warming link, shows that Gore’s apocalyptic view of global
warming is the “consensus” view among scientists.
It reports that 48 Nobel Prize-winning scientists accused Bush of distorting science, without
mentioning that the scientists acted as members of a 527 political group set up to promote the
Kerry for President Campaign.

Exaggerated statements
•
•
•

•

AIT hypes the importance and exaggerates the certainty of the alleged link between global
warming and the frequency and severity of tropical storms.
It claims polar bears “have been drowning in significant numbers,” based on a single report that
four polar bears drowned in one month of one year, following an abrupt storm.
It portrays the collapse in 2002 of the Larson-B ice shelf—a formation the “size of Rhode
Island”—as harbinger of doom. For perspective, the Larson-B was 220th the size of Texas and
1/246th the size of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS).
AIT presents a graph suggesting that China’s new fuel economy standards are almost 30% more
stringent than the current U.S. standards. In fact, the Chinese standards are only about 5%
more stringent.

Speculative statements
•
•
•

•

•

2

AIT blames global warming for the record-breaking 37-inch downpour in Mumbai, India, in
July 2005, even there has been no trend in Mumbai rainfall for the month of July in 45 years.
It blames global warming for recent floods in China’s Sichuan and Shandong provinces, even
though more damaging floods struck those areas in the 19th and early 20th centuries.
It blames global warming for the disappearance of Lake Chad, a disaster more likely stemming
from a combination of natural regional climate variability and societal factors such as
population increase and overgrazing.
AIT warns that a doubling of pre-industrial CO2 levels to 560 ppm will so acidify seawater that all
optimal areas for coral reef construction will disappear by 2050—implausible because coral
calcification rates have increased as ocean temperatures and CO2 levels have risen, and today’s
main reef builders evolved and thrived during the Mesozoic Period, when atmospheric CO2 levels
hovered above 1,000 ppm for 150 million years and exceeded 2,000 ppm for several million years.
It warns of “significant and alarming structural changes” in the submarine base of the WAIS,
but does not tell us what those changes are or why they are “significant and alarming.” The
WAIS has been retreating since the early Holocene. At the rate of retreat observed in the 1990s,
the WAIS should disappear in about 7,000 years.
  

•

It warns that “moulins”—vertical water tunnels formed from surface melt water—could cause
half the Greenland Ice Sheet to break off and “slide” into the sea, even though the scientific
study to which Gore alludes found that moulins increase glacial flow by only a few meters a
year.

Wrong statements
•

•
•
•

•

AIT claims glaciologist Lonnie Thompson’s reconstruction of climate history proves the
Medieval Warm Period was “tiny” compared to the warming observed in recent decades. It
doesn’t. Four of Thompson’s six ice cores indicate the Medieval Warm Period was as warm as
or warmer than any recent decade.
It claims the rate of global warming is accelerating, when it has been remarkably constant for
the past 30 years—roughly 0.17°C/decade.
It attributes Europe’s killer heat wave of 2003 to global warming; it was actually due to an
atmospheric circulation anomaly.
It claims that 2004 set an all-time record for the number of tornadoes in the United States.
Tornado frequency has not increased; rather, the detection of smaller tornadoes has increased.
If we consider the tornadoes that have been detectable for many decades (F-3 or greater), there
is actually a downward trend since 1950.
It blames global warming for a “mass extinction crisis” that is not, in fact, occurring.

In light of these and other distortions, AIT is ill-suited to serve as a guide to climate science and
climate policy for the American people.

  

3

Introduction

More people will see the movie, An Inconvenient Truth (AIT), than will read the book. However, the two
are so close in verbal content and visual imagery that, if you’ve seen the movie, you’ve practically read
the book, and vice versa. Because it is much easier to reference pages in a book than scenes from a movie,
the Skeptic’s Guide comments on the book version of AIT.
To minimize redundancy, the Skeptic’s Guide skips over introductory material that Vice President Gore
develops in greater detail later in AIT. In most cases, passages from AIT are reproduced verbatim. In cases
where passages are summarized, this will be clear from the context.
AIT does not have distinct chapters. To help the reader follow the sequence of topics under discussion, I
divide the Skeptic’s Guide into several sections. My commentary mostly follows the running order of
Gore’s presentation. However, to keep each section of the commentary focused on the same or similar
topics, I have—in some instances—grouped together thematically similar but non-consecutive passages
from AIT.
Some readers may wonder why I comment on almost every substantive statement Gore makes rather than
just the key points or the dozen or so most egregious distortions. Why cover so many seemingly minor
details?
Two considerations impelled me to take a comprehensive approach. First, anything less than a point-bypoint examination of AIT is too easy to dismiss as cherry picking. After all, any non-technical treatment
of complex scientific and economic issues is bound to be distorting to some degree. Confronted with a list
of a dozen errors, or even two dozen, critics could accuse me of quibbling and plausibly claim that Gore’s
most important points (whichever ones I did not comment on) were correct.
Second, AIT makes a powerful impression on audiences chiefly by the sheer number of assertions it
makes and images it presents. A typical audience reaction is to conclude that if even half of what Gore
says is true, then the planet is in serious trouble. So I decided to take a leaf out of Gore’s playbook. By the
sheer number of errors and distortions I have uncovered, I hope to foster a healthy skepticism about
global warming alarmism and the energy suppression agenda it allegedly justifies.

  

5

Chapter I: Greenhouse Basics

AIT: “The atmosphere is thin enough that we are capable of changing its composition.…
In particular, we have vastly increased the amount of carbon dioxide—the most important
of the so-called greenhouse gases.” (AIT, p. 25)
Comment: Water vapor, not carbon dioxide (CO2), is the most important greenhouse gas. Computing the
exact contribution of each type of greenhouse gas to the overall greenhouse effect is complicated, because
the gases “overlap” in some of the spectra in which they absorb infrared radiation. Taking the overlaps
into account, RealClimate.Org concludes that “water vapor is the single most important absorber
(between 36% and 66% of the greenhouse effect), and together with clouds makes up between 66% and
85%. CO2 alone makes up between 9 and 26%, while the O3 and the other minor GHG absorbers consist
of up to 7 and 8% of the effect, respectively.”1
Gore editorializes when he says that we have “vastly” increased the amount of CO2. The amount of
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is so small that CO2 is referred to as a “trace gas.” Over the past century
and a half, atmospheric CO2 levels have risen from about 280 parts per million (ppm) to about 380 ppm—
from roughly 3/100ths to roughly 4/100ths of one percent of the atmosphere.
The two-page photograph (pp. 24-25) accompanying Gore’s first mention of CO2 shows an electric power
plant belching what appears to be thick black smoke. A similar picture appears below.

The “smoke” is probably steam, but it looks dark and ominous against the inferno colors of a fading
sunset. Thus, readers (and film viewers) are set up to believe they are literally seeing CO2 spew out of
smokestacks, even though CO2 is as invisible as oxygen. Pictorially, AIT presents CO2 as an air pollutant,
reinforcing Gore’s oft-repeated description of CO2 as “global warming pollution.” This iconic and
rhetorical depiction of CO2 as pollution is inaccurate and manipulative.
Carbon dioxide is a climate “forcing” agent, but so is water vapor—the atmosphere’s main greenhouse
gas.2 Anybody who called water vapor “pollution” would be laughed out of court, yet CO2 is equally
  

7

innocent of having adverse effects on air quality. That is why a central goal of the Clean Air Act for more
than 30 years has been to make cars so clean burning that, ultimately, nothing comes out of the tailpipe
except water vapor and CO2.3 The phrase “global warming pollution” has no scientific meaning. It is
designed to prejudice people against fossil energy use by conflating CO2 with substances that dirty the air
and impair respiratory function.

AIT: “The greenhouse gases on Venus are so thick that its temperatures are far too hot
for humans. The greenhouse gases surrounding Mars are almost nonexistent, so the
temperature there is far too cold.” (AIT, p. 26)
Comment: This passage exaggerates CO2’s importance as a climate driver. Carbon dioxide makes up
about 95% of the atmospheres of both Venus and Mars. In contrast, CO2 makes up only few hundredths
of 1% of the Earth’s atmosphere. What makes Mars so cold is that it is about 44 million miles farther than
the Earth from the Sun, and its entire atmosphere is only about 1% as dense as Earth’s atmosphere.4 By
the same token, Venus, some 26 million miles closer than the Earth to the Sun, is very hot—hotter even
than Mercury—because its atmosphere is so dense. “Per unit of surface area,” comments
RealClimate.Org, “the atmosphere of Venus has as much mass as about 100 Earth atmospheres, and it is
almost pure CO2.”5
If AIT were a balanced presentation rather than a lawyer’s brief for alarm, it would have at least
acknowledged the environmental and health benefits of CO2 emissions. Carbon dioxide is not only a
greenhouse gas; it is also plant food, an aerial fertilizer. Literally hundreds of scientific studies show that
rising CO2 levels help trees, crops, and green things generally grow faster and larger, produce more fruit,
use water more efficiently, and resist stress from air pollution—the real stuff.
Based on experimental data, the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change estimates
that the 100-ppm increase in CO2 levels since pre-industrial times has increased average crop yields by
60% for wheat, 33% for fruits and melons, 62% for legumes, 67% for root and tuber crops, and 51% for
vegetables.6 An extraordinary positive externality, courtesy of the Industrial Revolution!
CO2 aerial fertilization not only makes more of a good thing, it also makes good things better. More CO2
boosts (a) the protein content of wheat, rice, and legumes, and (b) the antioxidant content of citrus and
other fruit.7
In short, we find error, rhetorical manipulation, exaggeration, and rank selectivity in what should be a
straightforward overview of greenhouse basics. This does not inspire confidence that subsequent, more
complex topics will receive a balanced treatment.

8

  

Chapter II: Mountain Glaciers

AIT: “It is evident in the world around us that very dramatic changes are taking place.
This is Mount Kilimanjaro in 1970 with its fabled snows and glaciers. Here it is just 30
years later—with far less ice and snow.... He [glaciologist Lonnie Thompson of Ohio
State University] predicts that within 10 years there will be no more ‘Snows of
Kilimanjaro.’” (AIT, pp. 42-45)

Mount Kilimanjaro: 1970, 2004

Comment: There is no question that “dramatic changes” are taking place in mountain glaciers. But it
does not necessarily follow that dramatic changes are occurring in global climate. Small changes in
temperature can produce rather large changes in mountain glaciers. So can changes in regional
precipitation that have nothing to do with CO2 emissions.
The shrinking Snows of Kilimanjaro make an ideal poster child for the alleged ravages of global
warming. Hardly anything is as picturesque as a snow-capped mountain, Kilimanjaro’s glacier is
vanishing, and warmth melts ice. So global warming must be to blame, right? Wrong.
Molg et al. (2003) note that Kilimanjaro’s glacier began to recede around 1880.8 They found “no evidence
of a sudden change in temperature at the end of the 19th century.” They also note that, “East African
long-term temperature records of the 20th century show diverse trends and do not exhibit a uniform
warming signal.” Moreover, monthly mean air temperatures at the Kilimanjaro glacier “only vary slightly
around the annual mean of -7.1°C, and air temperatures never rise above the freezing point.” The glacier
is shrinking but it is not melting.
What then is causing the ice cap to disappear? Kaser et al. (2004) examined glacial retreat on three East
African massifs, Rwenzori, Mount Kenya, and Kilimanjaro.9 They found that a “drastic dislocation”
occurred around 1880, when the region shifted from a “very humid” to a dry climate. This meant less
  

9

cloud cover, exposing the glacier to more direct sunlight, and less snowfall to replace the sublimating
(evaporating) ice. In the words of Kaser and colleagues: “The dominant reasons for this strong recession
[of all glaciers in equatorial East Africa] in modern times are reduced precipitation and increased
availability of shortwave radiation due to decreases in cloudiness.” They emphasize: “In contrast to the
‘switch’ in moisture conditions, there is no evidence of an abrupt change in air temperature…the glaciers
of Mount Kenya and in the Rwenzori Mountains seem to have responded clearly to this change in
moisture by retreating drastically and in spatially differential patterns.” The Figure below shows the
decline in glacier surface area due to the regional “switch” in moisture conditions.

Time series of glacier surface areas on Mt. Kenya (open circles), Mt. Kilimanjaro (closed circles), and in the Rwenzori
Mountains (crosses)
Source: Kaser et al. (2004)

It is worth emphasizing that 1880 is decades before industrial CO2 emissions could have had much impact
on global climate. Carbon dioxide levels at that time were approximately 290 parts per million (ppm),
only slightly above pre-industrial levels (280 ppm).10 See the Figure below.

CO2 levels over the past millennium
Source: Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, derived from Ethridge et al. (1998)

10

  

Analyzing the Kaser et al. study, climatologist Patrick Michaels observes that the Kilimanjaro glacier
retreated in periods of both global warming and cooling. During the warming of the first part of the 20th
century, Kilimanjaro lost 45% of its cap. During 1953 to 1976, when the planet was cooling, Kilimanjaro
lost another 21%. Since 1976, in the era of significantly elevated CO2 levels, the glacier lost another
12%—“the slowest melt rate of the last 100 years.”11
Since 1978, satellite measurements of Kilimanjaro air temperatures show a minuscule trend of +0.01
C/decade, essentially zero. See the Figure below.

Satellite-sensed temperatures in Kilimanjaro's neighborhood show no detectable warming since records began in late 1978.
Source: John Christy

Two key conclusions emerge. First, the Snows of Kilimanjaro would still be disappearing even in the
absence of anthropogenic global warming. As one recent study concluded, “Rather than changes in 20th
century climate being responsible for their demise, glaciers on Kilimanjaro appear to be remnants of a
past climate that was once able to sustain them.”12 Second, no change in energy policy can save the
glacier or could have saved it even if implemented decades ago.

AIT: “Our own Glacier National Park will soon need to be renamed ‘the park formerly
known as Glacier.’” (AIT, p. 46)
Comment: Glacier Park’s glaciers mostly melt in the summer months, and from 1888-2000, temperatures
in the vicinity of Glacier Park show no trend in June, a slight cooling trend in July, and a slight warming
trend in August. See the Figures for July and August, below.

  

11

1868-2000 Mean July, August Temperatures in the vicinity of Glacier National Park
Source of data: Kalispell, Station, MT (from the United States Historical Climatology Network dataset)

As in the case of Kilimanjaro, Glacier Park’s glaciers have been retreating long before anthropogenic
global warming could have had much of an impact on them. Writing in 1952, more than a half-century
ago, Dightman and Beatty report on the results of an aerial mapping program initiated in 1950 that
compared the new photographs with earlier glacial mapping efforts.13 Here are a few highlights:
•
•

•
•
•
•

“Grinell Glacier appears to have followed very well the pattern of decrease in glacier size observed
over the world in general for the last 70 to 80 years.”
“Dr. William C. Alden, of the United States Geological Survey, made the first comprehensive study
of the geology and the glaciers during the summers of 1911-13 and estimated that there were about 90
small glaciers…several of these individual glaciers at that time apparently had surface areas
exceeding 1 square mile.”
“Of the 50 small glaciers existing today [1952] in the park, only 1 has a surface area of nearly-onehalf square mile and not more than 7 others are over one-forth square mile in area.”
“During the 60-year period following the first written or photographic records of the these glaciers,
all have been rapidly depleted in both area and volume.”
“Many of the glaciers on the topographic map of the park (completed in 1914) are no longer in
existence and others are either inactive or too small to be considered true glaciers.”
“All glaciers lost at least 50 percent of their surface area in the 50-year period following the turn of
the present [20th] century; some lost as much as 80 percent, and several disappeared entirely.”

A few years prior to Dightman and Beatty’s 1952 report, the climate of western Montana turned cooler
and wetter and the glaciers in Glacier National Park stopped receding and began to grow again—until
about the mid-1970s. Studying the phenomenon of the ebb and flow of Glacier National Park’s glaciers,
Pederson et al. (2004) attribute the current phase of glacial retreat to a combination of decreased winter
snowpack and decreased summer precipitation.14 They write:
These records show that the 1850’s glacial maximum was likely produced by ~70 yrs of
cool/wet summers coupled with high snowpack. Post 1850, glacial retreat coincides with
an extended period (>50 yr) of summer drought and low snowpack culminating in the
exceptional events of 1917 to 1941 when retreat rates for some glaciers exceeded 100
m/yr. This research highlights potential local and ocean-based drivers of glacial

12

  

dynamics, and difficulties in separating the effects of global climate change from regional
expressions of decadal-scale climate variability.

Index of glacial mass balance potential for Glacier National Park. Mass balance potential based on proxy data (red
and blue fill) and instrumental data (dotted black line), which are shown.
Source: Pedersen et al. (2004)

AIT: “Almost all of the mountain glaciers in the world are now melting, many of them
quite rapidly. There is a message in this.” (AIT, p. 48)
Comment: Gore illustrates this statement with a two-page photograph of the Perito Moreno Glacier, in
Patagonia, Argentina, similar to the image immediately below.15

Perito Moreno Glacier

The photograph shows where the giant glacier terminates and flows into Lake Argentino, creating the
impression—thanks to Gore’s caption—that Perito Moreno is literally melting away. But the picture does
not show what Gore says it shows, because the glacier is not shrinking! Perito Moreno is famous for
  

13

being in a state of dynamic equilibrium, continually advancing and then unpredictably shedding ice via
spectacular calving events.16

AIT: “The red lines show how quickly the Columbia Glacier in Alaska has receded since
1980.” (AIT, p. 50)
AIT presents a picture similar to the one below.

Recession of the Columbia Glacier

Comment: It is unclear to what extent CO2-induced warming is responsible for the Columbia Glacier’s
recession.
First, like the Snows of Kilimanjaro and Glacier Park’s glaciers, the Columbia Glacier has been shrinking
since the early 20th century or before—prior to the rapid buildup in CO2 levels. According to Pelto and
Hartzell (2003), Columbia Glacier lost 57 meters of ice thickness from 1911 to 1984, 11 meters from
1965 to 2002, and 8 meters from 1980 to 2002.17 In other words, most of the loss in ice thickness
occurred before the major buildup in CO2 levels. Pelto and Hartzell also note that the Columbia Glacier
lost ice even during 1950-1976, “when conditions became cooler and precipitation increased.”
Second, during the past 55 years, there has been no overall temperature trend in the Prince William Sound
area, where the Columbia Glacier resides.

14

  

The annual temperature history of Southeastern Alaska (the average of observations taken at Annette Island, Sitka,
Juneau, and Yakutat, whenever available) shows no long-term trend.
Source: Patrick Michaels

AIT: “Everywhere in the world the story is the same, including in the Andes in South
America.” (AIT, p. 52)
Comment: Andean glaciers have been in retreat for 150 years, ever since the world emerged from the
Little Ice Age (LIA) cold period.18 The LIA was probably the coldest period of the last two millennia.
Many glaciers advanced and reached their maximum size during the LIA. Therefore, many were bound to
recede during the natural recovery from the LIA—including the tropical glaciers of the Peruvian Andes.
Polissar et al. (2006) found evidence of four LIA glacial advances in the tropical Andes during A.D.
1250-1810.19 Those advances coincided with periods of “solar-activity minima,” indicating a “strong
influence” of solar activity on “century-scale tropical climate variability during the late Holocene.”
Analyzing three of the Polissar team’s datasets that span the 1,500-year period from A.D. 500 to 2000, the
Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change found that all three indicate that the pre-LIA
period from roughly A.D. 550-1000 was warmer than the current warm period.
AIT gives the impression that massive glaciers are the norm in Peru. However, the Polissar team found
that, “during most of the past 10,000 years, glaciers were absent from all but the highest peaks in the
Cordillera de Merida [Peruvian Andes].” What that finding indicates, observes the Center for the Study of
Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, is that “warmer-than-present temperatures are the norm for this part
of the planet, and that any significant warming that might yet occur in this region (as well as most of the
rest of the world) would only mark a return to more typical Holocene (or current interglacial)
temperatures, which have themselves been significantly lower than those of all four prior interglacials.”20
Although a greenhouse “signal” may be detectable in the post-1970 period, the Peruvian Andes were
warmer during the mid-1940s, when CO2 levels were lower. See the Figure below.

  

15

Land Temperatures, Peruvian Andes
Source: John Christy

AIT should at least mention that changes in solar activity may account for much of the warming of the past
century and, thus, for part of the observed changes in mountain glaciers. For example, Scafetta and West
(2006) find a strong correlation between Northern Hemisphere temperature over the past 400 years and three
reconstructions of total solar irradiance (TSI) during the same period.21 See the Figure below.

Parallel trends in solar irradiance and Northern Hemisphere temperatures
Scafetta and West (2006)

The authors note that there is “good agreement between the patterns [of temperature and solar irradiance]
for the three pre-industrial era centuries,” and that during the 20th century “one continues to observe a
significant correlation between the solar and temperature patterns: both records show an increase from
16

  

1900 to 1950, a decrease from 1950 to 1970, and again an increase from 1970 to 2000.” Although
Scafetta and West believe that global warming since 1975 has occurred too quickly to be explained by
solar variability, they conclude that “the sun might have contributed approximately 50% of the total
global surface warming since 1900.”

AIT: “This beautiful image of a magnificent glacier in Patagonia, on the tip of South
America, shows how it stood 75 years ago. That vast expanse of ice is now gone.”
(AIT, p. 54)

Upsala Glacier, Patagonia, Argentina, 1928, 2004.

Comment: A quibbler might fault Gore for not mentioning Pio XI, the largest Patagonian glacier, which is
advancing and is “larger now than at any time in the last 6,000 years.”22 See the image below.

Glacier Pio XI

  

17

However, of 63 large Patagonian glaciers, only Pio XI and Perito Moreno are not retreating, and only Pio
XI is growing. The general pattern is one of glacial retreat and thinning. Although other factors, such as
decreased precipitation, are also at work, the predominant influence is global warming.23 Gore is correct
about that.
But is all or most of the warming due to rising CO2 levels? That is not as evident as Gore supposes.
Various proxy data indicate that Patagonian glaciers have waxed and waned for millennia as the Earth has
gone through natural climate oscillations. The Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global
Change24 summarizes a study25 that identified several alternating periods of glacial advance and retreat in
Patagonia:
Glasser et al. (2004) describe a large body of evidence related to glacier fluctuations in
the two major ice fields of Patagonia: the Hielo Patagonico Norte (47°00'S, 73°39'W) and
the Hielo Patagonico Sur (between 48°50'S and 51°30'S). This evidence indicates that
the most recent glacial advances in Patagonia occurred during the Little Ice Age, out of
which serious cold spell the earth has been gradually emerging for the past two centuries,
causing many glaciers to retreat. Prior to the Little Ice Age, however, there was an
interval of higher temperatures known as the Medieval Warm Period, when glaciers also
decreased in size and extent; and this warm interlude was in turn preceded by a still
earlier era of pronounced glacial activity that is designated the Dark Ages Cold Period,
which was also preceded by a period of higher temperatures and retreating glaciers that is
denoted the Roman Warm Period.
Prior to the Roman Warm Period, Glasser et al.'s presentation of the pertinent evidence
suggests there was another period of significant glacial advance that also lasted several
hundred years, which was preceded by a several-century interval when glaciers once
again lost ground, which was preceded by yet another multi-century period of glacial
advance, which was preceded by yet another long interval of glacier retrenchment, which
was preceded by still another full cycle of such temperature-related glacial activity, which
at this point brings us all the way back to sometime between 6000 and 5000 14C years
before the present (BP).
AIT allows or encourages the reader to assume that the 1928 photo shows the Upsala Glacier in its
“normal” condition—its baseline state. Too bad there are no photographs of Upsala from the Medieval
Warm Period, the Roman Warm Period, and the Holocene Climate Optimum. We might then find that
what we see in Gore’s 2004 photo is nothing new under the Sun.

AIT: “Throughout the Alps we are witnessing a similar story [of disappearing glaciers].”
(AIT, p. 56)
Comment: That is correct. Alpine glaciers have been in retreat since the world began to emerge from the
Little Ice Age, and this process is accelerating. The International Glacier Commission estimates that “the
glaciers in the European Alps have lost about half their total volume (roughly -0.5% per year) between
1850 and 1975, another 25% (or -1% per year) of the remaining amount between 1975 and 2000, and
additional 10 to 15% (or -2 to -3% per year) in the first five years of this century.”26 Ice loss is
accelerating both because Northern hemisphere temperatures increased since the mid-1970s and because

18

  

of local positive feedback effects—i.e., shrinking glaciers reflect less sunlight and expose more dark areas
to sunlight, warming their surroundings.
Several smaller Alpine glaciers advanced during the 1970s and 1980s—an effect of global cooling, global
“dimming” (a decrease in solar radiation reaching the Earth’s surface),27 or both. Similarly, many glaciers
in Europe and around the world advanced during the LIA. Global cooling is “good” for glaciers. But is it
good for people?
Here is a photograph of the Swiss Argentiere glacier in 1966:

Here is an illustration of the same glacier in 1850:

As Patrick Michaels likes to ask about the 1850 illustration, “What are these people praying for in this
church? They’re praying that the glacier does not destroy their town.”
Many of the larger Alpine glaciers reached their maximum extent during the Little Ice Age. If the LIA
had continued for another 150 years, through the end of the 20th century, those glaciers would likely have

  

19

grown beyond the dimensions they reached in 1850. AIT never faces the possibility that retreating glaciers
may be a price we must pay to avoid a much worse condition: global cooling.
At a minimum, AIT should acknowledge the difficulty of assessing the relative contributions of Man and
Nature to current Alpine glacier retreat. Holzhauser et al. (2005) found that the Great Aletsch Glacier, the
largest of all Alpine glaciers, was approximately 1,000 meters shorter than it is today during the late
Bronze Age Optimum from 1350 to 1250 BC, a period of exceptional warmth. The glacier grew in both
mass and length after an intervening unnamed cold period, and then “reached today’s extent or was even
somewhat shorter than today” during the “Iron/Roman Age Optimum between c. 200 BC and AD 50,”
otherwise known as the Roman Warm Period.28
Similarly, data presented by Joerin et al. (2006)29 indicates that Great Aletsch Glacier around 1000 A.D.
was slightly shorter than it was in 2002.30
These findings raise obvious questions. If the Great Aletsch glacier receded more in the Age of Achilles
and the Reign of the Caesars than it has in recent years, how can we be sure that CO2 emissions are the
chief cause of current Alpine glacier retreat? Is there evidence that people in ancient times suffered as a
consequence of the glacier’s retreat or the warming that produced it?

AIT: “The Himalayan Glaciers on the Tibetan Plateau …contain 100 times as much ice
as the Alps and provide more than half of the drinking water for 40% of the world’s
population—through seven Asian river systems that all originate on the same plateau.
Within the next half-century, that 40% of the world’s people may well face a very serious
drinking water shortage, unless the world acts boldly and quickly to mitigate global
warming.” (AIT, p. 58)
Comment: Again, to what extent is glacial retreat in the Himalayas due to rising CO2 levels versus
natural climate variability? The image below shows that considerable glacial retreat occurred before 1935.

Composite ASTER image showing retreat of the Gangotri Glacier terminus in the Garhwal Himalaya since 1780
Source: Land Processes Distributed Active Archive Center31

20

  

As regards Gore’s claim that global warming will cause water shortages, the water that feeds Asia’s river
systems comes from melting snow, not from melting glacial ice. Data going back four decades show no
trend in Eurasian snow cover for the months of November, December, January, February, and March.

Amount of Snow Cover in Eurasia from 1967-2005
35000000

Million sq. km

30000000
25000000

Nov. fall
Dec. fall
Jan. fall
Feb. fall
Mar. fall

20000000
15000000
10000000
5000000

03

00

20

97

20

94

19

91

19

88

19

85

19

82

19

79

19

76

19

73

19

70

19

19

19

67

0

Year

Figure is based on data from Rutgers University Global Snow Lab32

A recent study of Chinese snow cover found a “generally positive” trend over Western China during 1951
to 1997. Over the southern half of the study area—the Tibetan Plateau—the researchers found that
“annual cumulative daily snow depth increased by 2.3% per year.”33
Suppose for the sake of argument that Asian water supplies come from the glaciers. Wouldn’t accelerated
ice melt from global warming alleviate water shortages in the coming decades?34
Alternatively, suppose global warming diminishes annual Tibetan snow pack and, thus, Asian water
supplies. Could policymakers, by acting “boldly and quickly to mitigate global warming,” avert a “serious
drinking water shortage” over the “next half-century,” as Gore contends? No.
Let’s assume for the sake of argument that all the recent warming is due to rising CO2 levels. In that case,
the world is “already committed to a certain amount of warming” beyond what we have already
experienced, because the extra CO2 currently in the atmosphere will warm the planet for decades to
come.35 Moreover, atmospheric CO2 levels are bound to increase for decades, regardless of the mitigation
policies governments adopt. Therefore, CO2 regulations would provide little if any protection from
potential water shortages in Asia during the next half-century. Such policies might even be counterproductive, not only by diverting attention and resources from more effective water management options,
but also by suppressing the economic growth required to sustain investment in critical infrastructure.

  

21

To sum up, AIT ignores scientific studies that find a large role of natural variability in the shrinking of
mountain glaciers, never explains why we should prefer glacial growth (global cooling) to glacial retreat
(global warming), warns of an impending global warming-induced water shortages in Asia for which
there is no evidence, and hugely exaggerates the ability of energy-rationing schemes to avert or mitigate
water shortages in the policy-relevant future.

22

  

III. Climate Reconstructions from Proxy Data

AIT: “…the so-called global warming skeptics often say that global warming is really an
illusion reflecting nature’s cyclical fluctuations.” (AIT, p. 64)
Comment: Some so-called skeptics doubt that the current warming is entirely or mainly driven by rising
CO2 levels. That does not mean they view global warming as an “illusion.”36

AIT: “To support their view, they [the skeptics] frequently refer to the Medieval Warm
Period. But as Dr. [Lonnie] Thompson’s thermometer [analysis of the ratio of oxygen-16
to oxygen-18 in ice cores] shows, the vaunted Medieval Warm Period (the little red blip
from the left, below) was tiny compared to the enormous increase in temperatures of the
last half-century (the red peaks at the far right of the chart).” (AIT, p. 64)
Comment: Thompson analyzed the isotopic oxygen ratios in three Andean and three Tibetan ice cores.
The graph Gore presents on page 63—and again on pages 64-65—appears in Thompson’s study, but it is
not the graph of Thompson’s composite ice core data. Rather, Gore’s graph (Figure 7d of Thompson’s
paper) is the Hockey Stick reconstruction of Northern Hemisphere climate history (about which, more
presently), which Thompson included for purposes of comparison.37
More importantly, contrary to Gore’s assertion, Thompson’s study does not prove that the Medieval
Warm Period was “tiny” compared to the late 20th century warming.
To begin with, not all scientists accept Gore’s characterization of Thompson’s “thermometer” as “highly
accurate.” Ramirez et al. (2003) argue that, “in low latitudes empirical evidence linking temperature and
the stable water isotopes in modern precipitation breaks down and instead, precipitation amount
dominates the signal.”38 In other words, isotopic oxygen records from the tropical Andes may chiefly
reflect changes in precipitation rather than changes in temperature.39
Even if Thompson’s “thermometer” is accurate, the conclusion that Gore draws from it is questionable.
Of the three Tibetan ice cores Thompson examined, the Dunde and Guliya sites actually depict several
decadal periods of the past that were as warm as or warmer than the last few decades of the 20th century.
See the Figure below on the Guliya ice core.40

  

23

Guliya ice core
Source: Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide

Because the Dasuopo site shows a much more dramatic difference in the opposite direction, it rules the
average result. This is the correct way to average, but averaging would not be necessary if a reliable
reconstruction could be derived from a single site. Without many additional observations, it is impossible
to know whether Thompson’s average is truly representative or is skewed by a single dataset.
Similarly, of the three Andean ice cores Thompson examined, the Quelccaya and Sajema sites show
greater warming in past centuries than in the 20th century. See the Figure below on the Quelccaya ice
core.

Quelccaya ice core
Source: Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide

In short, only two of Thompson’s six sites show recent temperatures to be greater than earlier
temperatures.
24

  

Developing an accurate temperature history of past millennia requires many results from all around the
world using many types of proxy data. Numerous records indicate that the Medieval Warm Period and the
earlier Roman Warm Period were as warm as or warmer than the current warm period. The Center for the
Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change has reviewed literally scores of such studies. A survey
conducted by Sallie Baliunas and Willie Soon of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics found
79 studies in which proxy data from various locations “show periods of at least 50 years [during the past
millennium] which were warmer than any 50 years period of the 20th century.”41 As noted earlier, a 2006
study by Polissar and colleagues indicates that the Andes region was warmer during the Medieval Warm
Period than it is today. Bao et al. (2003), analyzing isotopic oxygen ratios and other proxy data, found
that each part of the Tibetan Plateau (northeastern, southern, and western) had at least one 50-year period
during the last 2000 years when the mean temperature was warmer than it was during the last 50 years.42

AIT: “Those global warming skeptics…launched a fierce attack against another
measurement of the 1,000-year correlation between CO2 and temperature known as “the
hockey stick,” a graphic image representing the research of climate scientist Michael
Mann and his colleagues [Raymond Bradley and Malcolm Hughes]. But in fact, scientists
have confirmed the same basic conclusions in multiple ways—with Thompson’s ice core
record as one of the most definitive.” (AIT, p. 65)
Comment: The “fierce attack”—actually nothing more than due diligence to check Mann’s data and
methods—was entirely appropriate. In its Third Assessment Report (2001), the IPCC presented the
hockey stick in the Summary for Policymakers, the Technical Summary, twice in Chapter 2 (“Observed
Climate Variability and Change”), and again in the Synthesis Report. The hockey stick was the basis for
the IPCC’s claim (Summary for Policymakers, p. 3) that “the 1990s [likely] have been the warmest
decade and 1998 the warmest year of the millennium.” Unsurprisingly, the hockey stick (see the Figure
below) became an instant poster child for global warming alarmism and pro-Kyoto advocacy.

The Hockey Stick
Source: IPCC

The hockey stick reconstruction depicted a relatively stable climate with a slight cooling trend from 1000
A.D. to 1900 (the shaft), and then a sharp upward spike in the 20th century (the blade). Two Canadians,
Stephen McIntyre and Ross McKitrick (M&M), published two critiques of the hockey stick in Energy &
Environment in 2003 and a third critique in Geophysical Research Letters in 2005.43 Among other

  

25

weaknesses, M&M found that Mann, Bradley, and Hughes (MBH) “de-centered” their proxy data,
picking a mean that inflates the importance of data generating hockey stick shapes.44
At the request of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, Dr. Edward J. Wegman of George Mason
University’s Center for Computational Statistics assembled a team of statisticians to assess M&M’s
critique of MBH’s data and methods.45 The Wegman team found that:
•
•
•

“The net effect of this decentering using the proxy data in MBH98 and MBH99 is to produce a
hockey stick shape.”
“In general, we found the writings of MBH98 and MBH99 to be somewhat obscure and incomplete
and the criticisms of M&M03/03a/05a to be valid.”
“Overall, our committee believes that the MBH99 assessment that the decade of the 1990s was likely
the hottest decade of the millennium and 1998 was likely the hottest year of the millennium cannot be
supported by their analysis.”

Gore suggests that MBH’s analytic shortcomings do not matter, because other scientists have confirmed
their results. But as M&M pointed out, and as Wegman confirmed, those other scientists often work with
Mann, and tend to use the same datasets. Because of these connections and shared proxies, the other
studies might not be as independent as they appear to be.
Far from being settled that the Medieval Warm Period was tiny compared to the current warming, a recent
reconstruction of Northern Hemisphere climate history shows a pronounced Little Ice Age preceded by a
Medieval Warm Period that is warmer than the present.46 See the Figure below.

Reconstruction of Northern Hemisphere temperature history from diatoms (plankton sediments)
Source: Weckström et al. (2006)

AIT: “At no point in the last 650,000 years before the pre-industrial era did the CO2
concentration go above 300 parts per million…CO2 is now [380 ppm]—way above
anything measured in the prior 650,000-year record.” (AIT, p. 66)
Comment: Both claims—that CO2 concentrations “never” rose above 300 ppm in pre-industrial times,
and that the current level is “way above anything” measured in the prior 650,000-year record—are
questionable. Wagner et al. (1999), analyzing the stomatal frequency of birch tree leaves buried in peat
deposits near Denekamp, in the Netherlands, estimate that CO2 levels during the early Holocene exceeded

26

  

330 ppm for centuries, rising as high as 348 ppm—roughly the CO2 level for 1987.47 The Center for
Carbon Dioxide and Global Change summarizes the Wagner team’s research:
Atmospheric CO2 concentrations 10,000 years ago were determined to be between 260
and 265 ppm. Thereafter, they rose to a value near 330 ppm over the course of a
century. Concentrations remained in the 330 ppm range over the next 300 years,
whereupon they declined to about 300 ppm. A second sharp increase in atmospheric CO2
concentration to a maximum value of 348 ppm followed, with concentrations hovering
between 333 and 347 ppm for the duration of the record.

AIT: “It’s a complicated relationship,” writes Gore, referring to a two-page graph
showing CO2 levels rising and falling along with global temperatures during the past
650,000 years, “but the most important part of it is this: When there is more CO2 in the
atmosphere, the temperature increases because more heat from the Sun is trapped inside.”
(AIT, p. 67)

AIT’s graph of CO2 levels and global temperatures over the past 650,000 years

Comment: The foregoing statement is carefully parsed. Gore does not actually say that changes in CO2
levels caused the alternation between ice ages and warm interglacial periods, but he allows or even
encourages readers (or viewers) to draw that conclusion. In reality, global temperature changes preceded
changes in CO2 levels by hundreds to thousands of years.48
The causality is very nearly the opposite of what Gore insinuates. When ocean temperatures fall, seawater
retains more dissolved CO2 , and the expansion of polar sea ice further limits sea-to-air CO2 flux.
Conversely, when the oceans warm, more dissolved CO2 outgases into the air.49 At most, changes in the
air’s CO2 content had an amplificatory effect on climate changes already under way.50
Ironically, Gore’s 650,000-year graph of CO2 levels and global temperatures shows that each of the
previous four interglacial periods was warmer than the one in which we are now living, even though CO2
levels were lower. Gore makes no mention of this, but it is well established in the scientific literature.51
For example, during the peak of the last interglacial period, roughly 130,000 to 127,000 years ago,
various proxy data indicate that summer surface temperatures in Arctic Canada and Greenland were 45°C warmer than the present, and large portions of Siberia were 4-8°C warmer.52 Multiple ice cores
indicate that East Antarctica was 2.5°C-5°C warmer than the present.53
  

27

In short, Gore exaggerates CO2’s importance in Earth’s climate history. Over the past several hundred
thousand years, changes in CO2 levels were chiefly the effect rather than the cause of changes in global
temperature, the Earth was warmer than it is today during previous interglacial periods when CO2 levels
were lower, and significant evidence indicates that the Medieval Warm Period was as warm as or warmer
than the current warm period.

28

  

IV. Global Warming Projections

AIT: “Here’s where CO2 is now [roughly 380 ppm]—way above anything measured in
the prior 650,000-year record. And within 45 years, this is where the CO2 levels will be
[roughly 620 ppm] if we do not make dramatic changes quickly.” (AIT, p. 65)
Comment: Gore here tacitly assumes what many climate models unrealistically assume, namely, that
CO2 concentrations increase at a rate of 1% annually. In reality, as Covey et al. (2003) point out, “The
rate of radiative forcing implied by 1% per year increasing CO2 is nearly a factor of 2 greater than the
actual anthropogenic forcing in recent decades, even if non-CO2-greenhouse gases are added in as part of
an ‘equivalent’ CO2 forcing’ and anthropogenic aerosols [which are assumed to exert a net cooling
influence on global temperatures] are ignored…”54
Since 1977, CO2 levels have been increasing at about 0.45% or 1.5 ppm per year.55 If this 30-year trend
continues, atmospheric CO2 levels will be about 446 ppm in 2050—a full 174 ppm lower than what Gore
projects.

There has been no significant trend in the annual growth rate of CO2 concentrations during the past 30 years.
The average value has been about 0.45%/year (values derived from data available from the
Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center).56
Source: World Climate Report.57

AIT: “The top right point of this gray line shows current global temperatures and the
bottom point marks the depth of the last ice age. That short distance—about an inch in
the graph—represents the difference, in Chicago, between a nice day and a mile of ice
over your head. Imagine what three times as much on the warm side would mean.” (AIT,
p. 67)
A photograph of Gore’s graph appears below.

  

29

AIT’s graph of CO2 levels and global temperatures over the past 650,000 years

Comment: Gore invites us to imagine “three times” as much warming as has occurred since the “depth of
the last ice age,” because the red line in his chart projects CO2 levels about three times higher than ice-age
levels by 2050. This thought experiment is unscientific on several counts. First, as we have just seen,
Gore’s projection of CO2 levels in 2050—roughly 620 ppm—assumes a higher rate of increase than has
been observed for the past 30 years. Second, the experiment implies that changes in CO2 levels preceded
and thus caused glaciations and de-glaciations. As noted above, the causality largely runs the other way.
Third, AIT tacitly assumes a linear relationship between CO2 levels and global temperatures, such that
every additional increment of CO2 “forces” the climate by as much as the previous increment. In reality,
the CO2-warming effect is roughly logarithmic, meaning that each 100-ppm increase adds less heat than
the previous 100-ppm increase.58 See the Figure below.

The CO2-warming effect—diminishing returns
Figure is derived from IPCC Third Assessment Report, Table 6.2, p. 358.

AIT: “And in recent years the rate of increase has been increasing. In fact, if you look at
the 21 hottest years measured, 20 of the 21 have occurred within the last 25 years.” (AIT,
p. 72)

30

  

Comment: There has been no increase in the rate of warming since the mid-1970s, when the second 20th
century warming period began. For the past 30 years, the planet has warmed at a remarkably constant rate
of 0.17°C (or 0.31°F) per decade.

Annual globally averaged temperature anomalies, 1977-2005
Data Source: Climate Research Unit59
Figure Source: World Climate Report60

Thus, although 2005 was the second warmest year in the instrumental record, it falls exactly on the
0.17°C per decade trend line of the past 30 years. No surprise at all.
As Patrick Michaels has pointed out on many occasions, the constant, or linear, as opposed to
accelerating, or exponential, rate of warming observed over the past three decades is “by and large the
same behavior the vast majority of climate models predict the earth’s temperature will display when
forced with ever increasing amounts of carbon dioxide.”

Temperature projections from a host of different climate models all run under a scenario of atmospheric carbon
dioxide concentrations increasing at a rate of 1%/year. All but one project constant warming rates.
Source: IPCC 2001, p. 537

  

31

If the “consensus” among climate models in favor of linear (non-accelerating) warming is correct (and, if
it isn’t, climate models are not reliable enough to guide policymakers anyway), then we are probably in
store for about 1.7°C of warming in the 21st century. Several models in the Figure predict more than
1.7°C of warming. But the models assume that CO2 levels will increase by 1% annually, whereas the
observed increase, as noted earlier, is only about half that rate—roughly 0.45% per decade. Therefore, we
should expect a warming rate that is not only non-accelerating but also lower than what most models
project. And that is in fact what we find in the instrumental record. The Figure below shows the observed
warming trend, reflecting the actual rate of CO2 increase, projected into the future.

Reasonable forecast of global warming based on 30 years of data and the linear form of most model projections
Source: World Climate Report

Gore does not explicitly say how much warming he expects to occur by mid-century. But in asking us to
imagine “three times as much” warming as has occurred since the last ice age, he clearly implies that
dramatic increases in average global temperature are in the offing. Both theory (the linear form of most
model projections) and observation (temperature data of the past 30 years) suggest that the warming of
the next several decades will be constant and moderate.

32

  

V. Heat

AIT: “We have already begun to see the kind of heat waves that scientists say will
become much more common if global warming is not addressed. In the summer of 2003
Europe was hit by a massive heat wave that killed 35,000 people.” (AIT, p. 75)
Comment: The European heat wave of 2003 was due to an atmospheric pressure anomaly, not global
warming. Here is what the United Nations Environment Program—hardly a bunch of global warming
skeptics—had to say:
This extreme weather was caused by an anti-cyclone firmly anchored over the western
European land mass holding back the rain-bearing depressions that usually enter the
continent from the Atlantic Ocean. This situation was exceptional in the extended length
of time (over 20 days) during which it conveyed very hot dry air from south of the
Mediterranean.61
Rasool et al. (2003) drew the same conclusion: “This study demonstrates that the summer 2003 heat wave
in Europe was not a direct result of a globally averaged warmer lower troposphere, but was primarily
associated with large scale circulation changes.”62
The death toll in Europe was terrible—but part of the blame falls on the European distaste for air
conditioning63 and higher electricity costs that discourage use of air conditioning.64 In the United States,
heat-related mortality has fallen as urban temperatures have risen. See the Figure below.

Annual population-adjusted heat-related mortality averaged across 28 major U.S. cities. Each bar represents a different
decade, beginning in the mid-1960s and ending in the late 1990s. Heat-related mortality has been steadily declining.
Source: World Climate Report, adapted from Davis et al. (2003)65

AIT: “In the summer of 2005 many cities in the American West broke all-time records for
high temperatures and for the number of consecutive days with temperatures of 100°F or
more. In all, more than 200 cities and towns in the West set all-time records.” (AIT, p. 76)

  

33

Comment: That may be correct, but AIT should mention that cities and towns generate local heat islands
that grow over time along with population.

For example, a satellite study found that, “over the course of 12 years, between 1987 and 1999, the mean
nighttime surface temperature heat island of Houston increased 0.82 ± 0.10 [°C].” The study noted that,
“the growth of the UHI [urban heat island], both in magnitude and spatial extent, scales roughly with the
increase in population, at approximately 30%.”66 One implication of this study is that urban temperature
records are apt to be broken continually as cities grow. As the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and
Global Change comments:
In just 12 years, the UHI of Houston grew by more than the IPCC calculates the mean
surface air temperature of the earth rose over the entire past century, over which period
the earth’s population rose by some 280% or nearly an order of magnitude more than the
12-year population growth experienced by Houston.

AIT: “The actual ocean temperatures are completely consistent with what has been
predicted as a result of man-made global warming. And they’re way above the range of
natural variability.” (AIT, p. 79)
Comment: Gore refers to a study finding 0.2-0.3°C of warming in the world’s ocean basins over the past
40 years.67 The study shows that actual ocean temperatures are consistent with greenhouse climate
models. However, the study does not show that ocean temperatures are “way above the range of natural
variability.” For example, deMenocal et al. (2000) found warming and cooling events in the Atlantic
Ocean off the coast of West Africa that appear to be synchronous with temperature changes in both
Greenland and the Bermuda Rise.68 All three reconstructions indicate greater warmth during the Medieval
Warm Period than the present. See the Figure below.

34

  

Three data sets show a synchronous warming during the Medieval Warm Period. Sea surface temperatures off the
West Coast of Africa and the Bermuda Rise were warmer than the present.
Source: deMenocal et al. (2000)

A recent update on global ocean temperatures found that a cooling between 2003 and 2005 eliminated
one-fifth of the long-term upper ocean heat gain believed to have occurred over the previous 48 years.69
This cooling event is a phenomenon no greenhouse climate model can replicate—a reminder that much
remains unknown about natural climate variability.70

  

35

VI. Hurricanes

AIT: “As the oceans get warmer, storms get stronger.” (AIT, p. 81)
Comment: Some storms may get stronger, but others may get weaker. There are two main types of
storms, hurricanes (tropical cyclones) and wintertime (frontal) storms. Global warming is likely to affect
each type differently.
Hurricanes draw their energy from the sea, and require warm sea surface temperatures (SSTs) to form.
Some hurricanes may get stronger as the oceans warm, and the area of hurricane formation may expand.
However, once SSTs reach about 83°F, as routinely happens in the Gulf of Mexico every summer, any
hurricane has the potential to become a major (Category 3, 4, or 5) storm, if other conditions are present.71
Such conditions include high humidity (dry air dissipates the hurricane’s thunderstorm core) and low
wind shear (strong winds in the upper troposphere rip hurricanes apart).72 Whether, or to what extent,
global warming is actually increasing the strength and/or frequency of hurricanes is an empirical question,
discussed below.
Wintertime storms draw their energy from the collision between cold and warm air fronts. If, as climate
models predict, the higher northern latitudes warm more than the lower tropical latitudes, the temperature
differential between colliding air masses should decrease, potentially reducing the intensity of some
winter storms.73

AIT: “But there is now a strong, new emerging consensus that global warming is indeed
linked to a significant increase in both the duration and intensity of hurricanes.” (AIT, p. 81)
Comment: The scientific jury is still out on these matters. Kerry Emanuel of MIT found that hurricane
strength, a combination of wind speed and storm duration, which he calls the “power dissipation index”
(PDI), increased by 50 percent since the mid-1970s, and that the increase is highly correlated with rising
SSTs.74 However, other experts question these results.
Roger Pielke, Jr. of the University of Colorado finds that once hurricane damage is normalized for
changes in population, wealth, and the consumer price index, there is no long-term change in hurricane
damage—evidence against the hypothesis that hurricanes are becoming more destructive.75 Christopher
Landsea of NOAA, noting no trend in the PDI for land-falling U.S. hurricanes, suggests that Emanuel’s
finding may be an “artifact of the data”—a consequence of advances in satellite technology, which have
improved detection, monitoring, and analysis of non-land-falling hurricanes.76
Philip Klotzbach of Colorado State University found “a large increasing trend in tropical cyclone intensity
and longevity for the North Atlantic basin and a considerable decreasing trend for the North Pacific,” but
essentially no trend in other tropical cyclone-producing ocean basins.77 See the Figure below.

  

37

Accumulated Cyclone Energy (ACE) index values for six ocean basins. The ACE index is a measure of the
energy contained in the tropical cyclone over its lifetime. There has been an increase in the North Atlantic, a
decrease in the Northeast Pacific, and not much long-term change anywhere else.
Source: Klotzbach (2006)

In reality, the “consensus” of the scientific community is that there is as yet “no consensus” about the
claim that global warming has significantly increased the severity of major storms. Consider this
conclusion reached by 120 scientists at a meeting of the World Meteorological Organization:
The possibility that greenhouse gas induced global warming may have already caused a
substantial increase in some tropical cyclone indices has been raised (e.g. Mann and
Emanuel, 2006), but no consensus has been reached on this issue.78

AIT: “Brand-new evidence is causing some scientists to assert that global warming is
even leading to an increased frequency of hurricanes, overwhelming the variability in
frequency long understood to be part of natural deep-current cycles.” (AIT, p. 81)
Comment: Gore doesn’t reference this “evidence,” so we are not in a position to evaluate whether it
shows an increased frequency of hurricanes. Emanuel (2005), a study Gore cited on page 81, reports that
38

  

ongoing research finds “no trend” in hurricane frequency. Webster et al. (2005), a study to which Gore
alludes on page 89 (see below), also found no increase in the overall number of tropical cyclones. Ren et
al. (2006) found a decrease during 1957-2004 in tropical cyclone precipitation and storm activity in
China.79 See the Figures below.

Total annual volume of tropical cyclone precipitation (a) and total number of tropical cyclone torrential rain events
(b) declined in China during 1957-2004
Source: Ren et al. (2006)

Frequency of rain-influencing tropical cyclones and typhoons in China declined during the same period.
Source: Ren et al. (2006)

AIT: “The emerging consensus linking global warming to the increasingly destructive power of
hurricanes has been based in part on research showing a significant increase in the number of
category 4 and 5 hurricanes.” (AIT, p. 89)
Comment: Peter Webster and colleagues found a significant increase in the number of major hurricanes
during the period 1970-2004.80 In contrast, Klotzbach found only a “small increase in global Category 4-5
hurricanes from the period 1986-1995 to the period 1996-2005,” and considers it likely that “improved
observational technology” accounts for the small increase he observed.
  

39

Patrick Michaels found that, in the Atlantic basin, the hurricane formation area with the best data over the
longest period, the “trend” observed by the Webster team disappears once data going back to 1940 are
included.81 As the Figure below shows, the number and percentage of intense storms from 1940 to 1970
were about equal to the number and percentage of intense storms from 1970 to 2004. The gray shaded
area illustrates the data in the 30-year period prior to the period analyzed by Webster et al. The pre-1970
data comes from the National Hurricane Center.82

Figure derived from National Hurricane Center data
Source: Patrick Michaels

Michaels comments: “When taken as a whole, the pattern appears to be better characterized as being
dominated by active and inactive periods that oscillate through time, rather than being one that indicates a
temporal trend.”
Since hurricanes are heat engines, it is likely that global warming will increase the number, strength,
and/or formation area of hurricanes to some extent. But by how much is unclear. Thomas Knutson of
NOAA and Robert Tuleya of Old Dominion University estimated in a 2004 study that a 2.0°C rise in
maximum SSTs would increase hurricane wind speed by about 6 percent over 80 years.83 “That means,”
Patrick Michaels comments, “global warming is likely to be responsible, right now, for at best, an
increase of about 0.6% in hurricane wind speeds—raising a decent hurricane of 120 mph to 120.7 mph, a
change too small to measure.”84
Knutson and Tuleya came to pretty much the same conclusion: “From our standpoint, the small 0.9
degree Fahrenheit warming observed in the Atlantic since 1900 implies only a 2-3 miles per hour
intensity increase to date. Such a small increase is hard to detect. It is difficult to attribute the upswing in
strong hurricane activity this past season to global warming. Season-to-season variability is very large.”85
Another modeling study, Bengtsson et al. (2006),86 projects no increase in tropical storm severity from
global warming:
•
•

40

“There are no changes in the extremes of tropical storms [in our model projection] in spite of
increased tropical SST by 2°–3°C.”
“The Atlantic [tropical] storms are reduced in number, in particular the stronger ones, while the
storms in the eastern Pacific are virtually unchanged though there is some indication of fewer extreme
  

storms. In the western Pacific there is little change. It is interesting to note that the change in SST by
between 2° and 3°C has not had any influence on the numbers and intensities of the more powerful
tropical storms.”
Since the Kyoto Protocol would avert an immeasurably small amount (0.07°C) of global warming by
2050,87 Kyoto-style approaches can provide no protection from hurricanes in the policy-relevant future.
Therefore, it is disingenuous for activists to claim that a hurricane-warming link justifies changes in U.S.
energy policy. Indeed, hyping the hurricane-warming link can be counterproductive. If people seek
protection from hurricanes in climate change policy, they are apt to neglect the preparedness measures
that can actually save lives.
Ten hurricane scientists, including Kerry Emanuel and Peter Webster, recently issued a “Statement on the
U.S. Hurricane Problem.”88 The scientists urge policymakers not to let the debate about the “possible
influence” of global warming on hurricane activity “detract from the main hurricane problem facing the
United States: the ever-growing concentration of population and wealth in vulnerable coastal regions.”
Contributing to that problem, they argue, are federal and state insurance and disaster-relief programs that
“subsidize” development in high-risk areas. Although optimistic that “continued research will eventually
resolve much of the current controversy over the effect of climate change on hurricanes,” they emphasize
that, “the more urgent problem of our lemming-like march to the sea requires immediate and sustained
attention.” They consequently call upon policymakers to undertake a comprehensive evaluation of
“building practices, and insurance, land use, and disaster relief policies that currently serve to promote an
ever-increasing vulnerability to hurricanes.” This science-based perspective on hurricane risk is absent
from AIT.

AIT: “In 2004, Florida was hit with four unusually powerful hurricanes.” (AIT, p. 83)
Comment: Yes, but was that due to global warming? Satellite measurements show that, in 2004, the
Atlantic hurricane basin had the coolest June-July-August (season 3) since 2000, and the 8th coolest since
1979.89 No hurricanes made landfall in the United States in 2006. Is that evidence against a link between
global warming and hurricanes?

AIT: “…that same year, Japan set an all-time record for typhoons. The previous record
was seven. In 2004, 10 typhoons hit Japan.” (AIT p. 83)
Comment: The Figure below shows the number of tropical storms and typhoons (Tropical Cyclones, or
TCs) over the Western North Pacific, from 1950 through 2005. The data simply do not reveal a linear
trend corresponding to the gradual increase in atmospheric CO2 levels. Besides, whether a particular
storm “hits” Japan—its trajectory—depends on local meteorological factors, not average global
temperatures.

  

41

Tropical cyclones near Japan were more frequent in the 1960s
Source: Matsuura et al. (2003), updated February 200690

AIT: “In the spring of 2006, Australia was hit by several unusually strong, Category 5
cyclones, including Cyclone Monica, the strongest cyclone ever measured, off the coast
of Australia—stronger than Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, or Wilma.” (AIT, p. 82)
Comment: Monica attained wind speeds of 180 mph, making it the strongest cyclone of 2006. Whether it
was the strongest cyclone ever measured is unclear. At least five U.S. hurricanes had equal or greater
wind speeds, including Hurricane Dog, attaining a wind speed of 185 mph on September 6, 1950, and
Hurricane Camille, attaining a wind speed of 190 mph on August 17, 1969.91
More importantly, Australia’s hurricane season in 2006 was not exceptional. According to NOAA, “The
tropical cyclone season in the Australian region has been near average with the development of 12 storms,
two more than average. Although final assessments of tropical cyclone strength are continuing, it is
thought that 25 percent of these storms reached Category 5 strength on the Australian scale.”92

AIT: “Textbooks had to be re-written in 2004. They used to say, ‘It’s impossible to have
hurricanes in the South Atlantic.’ But that year, for the first time ever, a hurricane hit
Brazil.” (AIT, p. 84)
Comment: Gore gives the impression that Hurricane Catarina, the first hurricane on record to make landfall
in Brazil, arose from abnormally high SSTs due to global warming. In reality, in 2004, January and
February (Brazil’s summer months) “were the coldest in 25 years,” according to climatologist Pedro Leite
da Silva Dias of the University of Sao Paolo. SSTs were also cooler than normal. However, the air was so
much colder than the water that it caused the same kind of heat flux that fuels hurricanes in warmer waters.
At the same time, wind shear, which disorganizes hurricanes, was weaker than usual. “Before long,” says
Bob Hensen of the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, “the heat flux and light shear gave
birth to a system that bore the satellite earmarks of a hurricane.”93 To blame rising CO2 levels for Catarina,
Gore would have to argue that global warming cooled the water and made the air even colder.
42

  

AIT: “And then came Katrina….The consequences were horrendous. There are no words
to describe them.” (AIT, pp. 94-95)
Comment: The consequences of Katrina were horrendous, but it is sheer demagoguery to blame CO2
emissions for the devastation. Kerry Emanuel, the very scientist whose work Gore cites to claim a
“strong…emerging consensus” that global warming is increasing hurricane duration and intensity,
cautioned against attempts to link Katrina or other recent Atlantic storms to global warming. In an
interview that occurred while Katrina was still raging, Emanuel stated: “So, of course, it’s tempting. We
have had this very active last ten years, along the U.S. and gulf coasts to blame that on global warming,
but looking at it statistically, that’s a very difficult connection to make. I think what you are seeing mostly
is a natural cycle in this case.”94
More importantly, Katrina was the worst natural disaster in U.S. history not because the hurricane was so
powerful—it was a category 3 storm by the time it made landfall—but because the federal government
had failed to build adequate flood defenses for New Orleans. My colleague, John Berlau, chronicles this
sad tale in an important new book.95
In a nutshell, policymakers knew for decades that the city’s existing system of canals, dikes, flood walls,
and levees was inadequate to protect New Orleans. In the 1960s and 1970s, the Corps of Engineers
proposed to build large steel and concrete gates to prevent hurricane force winds from driving storm
surges into the Lake Pontchartrain and across into New Orleans. Local politicians and Louisiana’s
congressional delegation were on board with this proposal. However, environmental pressure groups sued
the Corps under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) to block construction of the flood
protection gates. They succeeded.
Katrina devastated New Orleans because the levees, battered by storm surges, broke, allowing the Lake to
pour into and inundate the city. The flood control system proposed by the Corps would in all likelihood
have prevented the enormous loss of life and record-breaking economic losses. Litigation, not rising CO2
levels, was the “anthropogenic” factor that turned Katrina into a horrific catastrophe.

AIT: “And before Wilma left the scene, something new happened: We ran out of names.
For the first time in history, the World Meteorological Organization had to start using the
letters of the Greek alphabet to name the hurricanes and tropical storms that continued on
into December—well past the end of the 2005 hurricane season.” (AIT, p. 103)
Comment: NOAA’s Web site explains that if there are more than 21 named tropical cyclones in the
Atlantic basin in a season, additional storms will be assigned letters from the Greek alphabet. The use of
Greek letters to name storms in 2005 was “the first time in history,” as Gore says, but the practice of naming
storms only goes back to 1953.96 Hurricane detection capabilities have improved dramatically since the
1950s, to say nothing of prior decades. So although 2005 had a record number of named Atlantic basin
hurricanes, this does not tell us much beyond the fact that 2005 was a very active hurricane year.
Furthermore, 2005 was not the first year hurricanes and tropical storms continued into December. It also
happened in 1878, 1887, 1888, 1925, 1953, 1975, 1984, 1989, 1998, 2001, and 2003.97

  

43

VII. Tornadoes, Floods, Fire, and Drought

AIT: “Also in 2004, the all-time record for tornadoes in the United States was broken.”
(AIT, p. 87)
Comment: Tornado frequency has not increased; rather, the detection of smaller tornadoes has increased.
If we consider the tornadoes that have been detectable for many decades (i.e. F-3 or greater), there is
actually a slightly downward trend since 1950. See the Figure below.

The number of strong tornadoes has declined
Source: National Climate Data Center98

Oklahoma experienced its longest tornado-free period in 2003-4 (May 17, 2003-January 20, 2004), and
the State had only one tornado of F2 strength or greater in all of 2004.99 As a whole, the United States has
not experienced an F5 tornado—the strongest of all tornadoes—in 7 years, the longest F5-free period in
recorded U.S. tornado history.100 Was that in spite of global warming, or because of it?

AIT: “Over the last three decades, insurance companies have seen a 15-fold increase in
the amount of money paid to victims of extreme weather. Hurricanes, floods, drought,
tornados, wildfires and other natural disasters have caused these losses.” (AIT, p. 101)
Gore presents a graph similar to the Figure below.

  

45

Typical chart of non-adjusted weather-related economic losses

Comment: Gore does not say whether these loss estimates are adjusted for increases in population,
wealth, and the consumer price index. Absent careful adjustment for societal factors, it is impossible and
unscientific to infer climate trends from weather-related losses.
Kunkel et al. (1999) examined whether increases in mortality and economic losses due to extreme
weather events mirrored changes in the physical magnitude of such events.101 They concluded that
“increasing losses are primarily due to increasing vulnerability arising from a variety of societal changes,
including a growing population in higher risk coastal areas and large cities, more property subject to
damage, and lifestyle and demographic changes subjecting lives and property to greater exposure.” Other
key findings include:
•
•
•

•
•

Scientists cannot yet quantify the possible contribution of an increase in the frequency of heavy rain
events to increases in flood-related damage.
When hurricane losses are adjusted for changes in population, inflation, and wealth, “there is instead
a downward trend.”
“Increasing property losses due to thunderstorm related phenomena (winds, hail, tornadoes) are
explained entirely by changes in societal factors, consistent with the observed trends in the
thunderstorm phenomena.”
“There is no evidence of changes in drought-related losses (although data are poor) and no apparent
trend in climatic drought frequency.”
“There is also no evidence of changes in the frequency of intense heat or cold waves.”

In a paper recently submitted for publication, Roger Pielke, Jr. and five colleagues examine the latest data
on U.S. economic losses from hurricanes. They found no trend from 1900 to 2005 once the data are
“normalized” for changes in population, wealth, and inflation.102 The Figures below show non-adjusted
and adjusted U.S. losses from hurricanes.

46

  

Adjust the weather-related losses for population growth, wealth, and inflation, and the warming signal disappears.
Source: Pielke, Jr. et al. (submitted, Nov. 2006)

The issue of primary concern to most people is whether mortality from extreme weather events is
increasing or declining. The good news, says economist Indur Goklany, is that, despite the increase of
population in high-risk areas, “aggregate mortality and mortality rates due to extreme weather events are
generally lower than they used to be.”103 According to Goklany:
Globally, mortality and mortality rates have declined by 95 percent or more since the
1920s. The largest improvements came from declines in mortality due to droughts and
floods, which apparently were responsible for 95 percent of all deaths caused by extreme
events during the 20th century. For windstorms, which contributed most of the remaining
5 percent of fatalities, mortality rates were also lower today but there are no clear trends
for mortality. Cumulatively, the declines more than compensated for increases due to the
2003 [European] heat wave. With regard to the U.S., current mortality and mortality rates
due to extreme temperatures, tornadoes, lightning, floods and hurricanes are also below
their peak levels of a few decades ago. The declines for the last four categories range
from 55 to 95 percent.

  

47

Weather-related deaths and death rates have declined dramatically.
Source: Goklany

AIT: “Warmer water increases the moisture content of storms, and warmer air holds
more moisture. When storm conditions trigger a downpour, more of it falls in the form of
big, one-time rainfalls and snowfalls. (AIT, p. 106)
Comment: This is certainly plausible, but how important global warming might be compared to other
meteorological factors affecting the frequency or intensity of “big, one-time” precipitation events is
unknown. A recent study of the Iberian Peninsula found that, from 1958 to 1997, there was an increasing
trend in the number of days with light rainfall and a decrease in the number of days with moderate,
intense, and very intense rainfall.104

AIT: Partly as a result [of the increase in big downpours], the number of large flood events
has increased decade by decade, on every continent.” Gore illustrates the last point with a
chart titled, “Number of Major Flood Events by Continent and Decade.” (AIT, p. 106)
Comment: Gore’s chart is based on Figure 16.5 (page 448) of the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
(MEA) report, EcoSystems & Human Well-Being.105 As presented in AIT, the chart appears to chronicle
changes in the number of “major” floods, i.e., events of a certain physical magnitude. In fact, as a glance
at the MEA report reveals, what the chart measures are changes in the number of “damaging” floods.
Whether or not a flood is classified as “damaging” is heavily influenced by socioeconomic and even
political factors. As the MEA report explains: “Only events that are classified as disasters are reported in
this database. (An event is declared a disaster if it meets at least one of the following criteria: 10 or more
people reported killed; 100 or more people reported affected; international assistance was called; or a
state of emergency was declared (OFDA/CRED 2002).”

48

  

Obviously, the database is going to be skewed toward more events in later decades, simply because of better
reporting, more declared states of emergency, and more calls for international assistance. As the MEA
report observes: “Figure 16.5 shows a clear increase in the number of floods since the 1940s for every
continent and a roughly constant rate of increase for each decade. However, it should be noted that although
the number has been increasing, the actual reporting and recording of floods have also increased since 1940,
due to the improvements in telecommunications and improved coverage of global information.”
The MEA report further states: “Flood processes are controlled by many factors, climate being one of
them. Other non-climatic factors include changes in terrestrial systems (that is, hydrological and
ecological systems [such as wetlands loss and deforestation]) and socioeconomic systems. In Germany,
for instance, flood hazards have increased (Van der Plog et al. 2002) partly as a result of changes in
engineering practices, agricultural intensification, and urbanization (direct and indirect drivers).” Two
other non-climatic factors that massively affect the degree of damage from a particular flood are
population growth and economic development in coastal areas and flood plains.
Teasing out a greenhouse warming signal from flood damages affected by both natural climate variability
and a host of societal factors may well be beyond human capability. Yet AIT presents flood damage data
as unambiguous evidence of a global-warming ravaged planet.
The Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change summarizes the literature on floods and
climate variability:
•

•

•

Asia: “The results of these [five] studies from Asia provide no support for the climate-alarmist claim
that global warming leads to more frequent and severe flooding. If anything, they hint at an opposite
effect.”106
Europe: “In light of this body of evidence [17 studies], it is clear that for most of Europe, as well as
many other parts of the world, there are simply no compelling real-world data to support the climatealarmist claim that global warming leads to more frequent and severe flooding.”107
North America: “Taken together, the research described in this Summary [21 studies] suggests that,
if anything, North American flooding tends to become both less frequent and less severe when the
planet warms, although there have been some exceptions to this general rule.”108

AIT: “In many areas of the world, global warming also increases the percentage of
annual precipitation that falls as rain instead of snow, which has led to more flooding in
spring and early summer. In 2005 Europe had a year of unusual catastrophes similar to
the one in the United States.” (AIT, p. 106)
Comment: In other words, we had Katrina; they had disastrous floods. But we did not only have Katrina;
we also had a record 668 inches of snowfall on Mammoth Mountain in California during 2005-06—the
most in 38 years.109 Many other ski resorts in California, the Pacific Northwest, Canadian Rockies and
Vancouver, U.S. Northern Rockies, Utah, and Colorado posted above-average snowfalls in 2005-2006,
and many had “high” snowfalls in 2004-05, including three “record high” snowfalls.110 Again, was this in
spite of global warming, or because of it?

AIT: “July 2005, Mumbai [Bombay], India, received 37 inches of rain in 24 hours—the
largest downpour any Indian city has received in one day.” (AIT, p. 110)
  

49

Comment: It is scientifically illegitimate to attribute any particular precipitation event to a gradual
increase in average atmospheric temperatures. If global warming were influencing rainfall in Mumbai, we
would expect to see it in long-term precipitation records. Mumbai has two weather stations that keep
detailed records on precipitation.111 Neither shows any trend in July rainfall over the past 45 years. See
the Figures below.

Mumbai weather stations show no trend in July rainfall over the past 45 years.

AIT: “There has also been record flooding in China, which, as one of the planet’s oldest
civilizations, keeps the best flood records of any nation in the world. Recently, for
example, there were huge floods in Sichuan and Shandong provinces.”
(AIT, p.112)
Comment: Catastrophic floods have hit those provinces repeatedly from time immemorial. The Yellow
River runs through Shandong Province. A PBS report, “Dealing with the Deluge,”112 observed:
Westerners have dubbed it [Yellow River] “China's Sorrow,” because over the centuries
it has killed more people than any other river in the world. In 1887 flooding killed nearly
two million people, in 1931 the death toll was almost four million, and in 1938 it was
almost one million.
50

  

The Yangtze River runs through Sichuan Province. According to Xia Jun of the Chinese Academy of
Science and Yongoin Chen of the University of Hong Kong, 23 severe floods occurred in the Yangtze
basin from 1843 to 1992—once every seven years on average. The “most disastrous” Yangtze flood in
modern times occurred in 1954. “This exceptionally serious flood struck 123 counties and cities and
inundated 3.17 million ha of land, forcing 188.8 million people to suffer and taking over 30,000 lives.”113
By comparison, the Yangtze flood of 1998 killed an estimated 3,000 people.
Predictably, AIT never mentions the most important “anthropogenic” influences contributing to flood risk
on the Yangtze. In a study of the 1998 flood, two Chinese scholars found that “precipitation over the
catchments and the floodwater discharge from the upper basin did not exceed the historical maximum.”114
However, land-use changes—including, paradoxically, flood control projects—“greatly increased” the
risk of catastrophic flooding:
Extensive reclamation of the lakes and fluvial islands in the middle basin has
considerably reduced the floodwater storage and drainage capacity of these natural
landscapes of the Yangtze Basin. Deforestation in the catchment area has induced soil
erosion, resulting in a large amount of sediment deposited in reservoirs whose storage
capacity is thus reduced. Strengthening the flood defense to protect people living on the
floodplain has raised the water level during the flood.

AIT: “Wildfires are becoming much more common as hotter temperatures dry out the
soil and the leaves. In addition, warmer air produces more lightning. The graph below
shows the steady increase in major wildfires in North and South America over the last
five decades; the same pattern is found on every other continent as well.” (AIT, p. 229)
Comment: Gore’s graph is based on Figure 16.3 (page 449) of the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
(MEA) report, Ecosystems & Human Well-Being.115 The figure in the MEA report is titled, “Number of
Recorded Wildfires.” Gore re-labels it as “Number of Major Wildfires.” As the MEA report indicates,
satellite monitoring of wildfires is a fairly recent development. To what extent are the big jumps in the
number of “recorded” wildfires since 1980 and 1990 an artifact of the data? Gore’s re-labeling hides this
issue from the reader.
The MEA report confirms that hotter, drier climates tend to produce more wildfires, and hence that global
warming will increase wildfire risk in some areas. However, just as Gore ignored societal factors (e.g.,
population growth in flood plains) affecting the number of “damaging floods,” he similarly ignores
societal factors affecting the number of “recorded” wildfires. In developing countries, many “wildfires”
start as fires people deliberately set to clear land for agriculture, highways, and logging. Gore surely
knows this, since on page 227 he laments the fact that “much of the forest destruction” around the world
comes from “the burning of brushland for subsistence agriculture and wood for cooking.”
Although the number of “recorded” wildfires is increasing, the MEA report finds “a general long-term
reduction in the area burned.” In the United States, for example, “the area burned has declined more than
90% since 1930.” AIT fosters the opposite impression—that more and more of the United States is
literally going up in smoke.

  

51

AIT: “The nearby Anhui province [in China] was continuing to suffer a severe drought at
the same time the neighboring areas were flooding. One of the reasons for this paradox
has to do with the fact that global warming not only increases precipitation world wide
but at the same time causes some of it to relocate.” (AIT, p. 113)
Comment: This is a little too convenient. In Gore’s worldview, if there’s a downpour, that’s global
warming. If there’s a drought, that’s global warming. Global warming can only intensify droughts and
floods—never make wet places drier or dry places moister. Floods and droughts were less frequent and
less severe in the good old days before SUVs and coal-fired power plants. This is the stuff of fairy tales,
not science.

AIT: Gore blames global warming for the disappearance of Lake Chad (see the images
below), which in turn contributed to famine and genocide in the region. He sermonizes:
Lake Chad’s “fate is sadly emblematic of a part of the world where climate change can be
measured not just in temperature increases but in lives lost.” The “more we understand
about climate change, the more it looks as if we [the United States, which emits a quarter
of the world’s greenhouse gases] may be the real culprit.” He concludes: “It is time to
take a hard honest look at our role in this escalating disaster. We helped manufacture the
suffering in Africa, and we have a moral obligation to try to fix it.” (AIT, p. 117)

Images of Lake Chad
Source: NASA 116

Comment: Two responses are in order here, one regarding Africa generally; the other specific to Lake
Chad. Since 1950 southern Africa and the Sahel region have experienced significant reductions in rainfall,
drying the soil and causing the desert to expand—a process called “desertification.” Climate alarmists
often blame desertification on CO2-induced global warming. However, a recent study challenges this
conventional wisdom. Hoerling et al. (2006) compared actual precipitation data with the rainfall
simulations of 18 climate models used by the IPCC in its Fourth Assessment Report. The Center for the
Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change summarizes the Hoerling team’s findings:
52

  

In the words of the four researchers, “the ensemble of greenhouse-gas-forced
experiments, conducted as part of the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, fails to simulate the pattern or amplitude of the twentiethcentury African drying, indicating that the drought conditions were likely of natural
origin.” In fact, they say that for both of the regions studied, “the observed trend
amplitude exceeded that of the greenhouse gas signal by an order of magnitude,” and
they state once again that they “therefore concluded that greenhouse gas forcing played
little or no role in the 1950-99 observed African drying trends.” What is more, they say
there is “considerable spread” among the 18 model projections, making their mean trend
so small that they suggest that “natural variability will continue to be the primary driver
of [Africa’s] low-frequency rainfall variations during the next century.”
In short, the Center concludes, “there is absolutely no evidence that the 20th-century drying of much of
Africa was in any way related to CO2-induced global warming, nor is there any model-based reason for
supposing it will be so related over the next century.”117
Turning now to the specific case of Lake Chad, a study by Jonathon Foley and Michael Coe of the
University of Wisconsin concluded that Lake’s decline probably has nothing to do with global warming.
The two scientists based their findings on computer models and satellite imagery made available by
NASA. They attribute the Lake’s condition to a combination of regional climate variability and societal
factors such as population increase and overgrazing. National Geographic interviewed the researchers
and summarized their study:
Historically, Lake Chad received most of its water from the monsoon rains that fell
annually from June to August. But beginning in the late 1960s, the region experienced a
series of devastating droughts. As the rains increasingly failed to come, the region began
undergoing desertification. At the same time, local people became more and more
dependent on the lake as a source of water to replace the water they had previously
obtained from the monsoons.118
Note that the change from a wet to a dry climate began in the late 1960s, when global climate was still in
a cooling trend. The article continues:
Overgrazing of the savanna is one of the biggest factors in the shrinking of the lake,
according to Coe and Foley. “As the climate became drier, the vegetation that supported
grazing livestock began to disappear. Vegetation has a big influence, especially in semiarid regions, in determining weather patterns,” said Foley. “The loss of vegetation in
itself contributed to a drier climate.” The situation is a “domino effect,” the researchers
say. Overgrazing reduces vegetation, which in turn reduces the ecosystem's ability to
recycle moisture back into the atmosphere. That contributes to the retreat of the
monsoons. The consequent drought conditions have triggered a huge increase in the use
of lake water for irrigation, while the Sahara has gradually edged southward.
In short, the Lake Chad disaster was one part local climate variation, one part local tragedy of the
commons. Yet Gore blames the USA. He calls global warming a “moral issue,” but for him it is actually a
moralizing issue. Global warming allows Gore to discover moral agency and guilt in the workings of
inanimate nature. It allows him to “blame America first” for misfortunes around the world that may be
entirely due to local actions and/or climatic factors beyond human control.

  

53

AIT: “Global warming also sucks more moisture out of the soil. Partly as a consequence,
desertification has been increasing in the world decade by decade.” (AIT, p. 118)
Comment: Why then do pan evaporation studies, such as Roderick and Farquhar (2004),119 indicate that
evaporation from soils has been decreasing since the 1950s in the former Soviet Union, Eurasia,
Australia, and North America? Roderick and Farquhar say “it is now clear that many places in the
Northern Hemisphere, and in Australia, have become less arid,” and that “in these places, the terrestrial
surface is both warmer and effectively wetter.” Their data suggest that the Earth’s surface is “literally
becoming more like a gardener’s ‘greenhouse’.”
Although intuitively plausible, a link between global warming and drought is more difficult to establish
than Gore seems to think. No U.S. drought in recent decades was as severe as the drought of the 1930s.
See the image below.

The Dust Bowl

Nor was the 1930s drought outside the range of natural variability. Consider this excerpt from NOAA’s
Paleoclimatology Program:
Longer records show strong evidence for a drought [in the 16th century] that appears to
have been more severe in some areas of central North America than anything we have
experienced in the 20th century, including the 1930s drought. Tree-ring records from
around North America document episodes of severe drought during the last half of the
16th century. Drought is reconstructed as far east as Jamestown, Virginia, where tree
rings reflect several extended periods of drought that coincided with the disappearance of
the Roanoke Colonists, and difficult times for the Jamestown colony. These droughts
were extremely severe and lasted for three to six years, a long time for such severe
drought conditions to persist in this region of North America. Coincident droughts, or the
same droughts, are apparent in tree-ring records from Mexico to British Columbia, and
from California to the East Coast …120

54

  

AIT: “The map [below] shows what is projected to happen to soil moisture in the United
States with the doubling of CO2, which would happen in less than 50 years if we continue
business as usual. According to scientists, it will lead, among other things to a loss in soil
moisture of up to 35% in vast growing areas of our country.” (AIT, p. 121)

Source: Princeton GDFL R15 Climate Model

Comment: The map shows what one climate model (the Princeton Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory R15 model) projects would happen to U.S. soil moisture with a doubling of CO2. Not all
models reach this conclusion. The Clinton-Gore Administration used two models—Canadian Climate
Center and Hadley Center—to produce its major global warming report, U.S. National Assessment of the
Potential Consequences of Climate Variability and Change.121 Like the Princeton model, the Canadian
model predicts increased dryness. The Hadley model, on the other hand, predicts increased wetness. See
the image below.

Source: U.S. Global Change Research Program, National Assessment report, p. 552.

In a report commissioned by the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, Kenneth Frederick and Peter
Gleick described the different results predicted by those models:
The Canadian model suggests runoff would decline in all regions except California. In 12
of the 18 regions, runoff declines by more than 20 percent, an outcome that would have
  

55

serious adverse impacts. In contrast, the Hadley model projects increases in average
runoff in most regions; the majority of the nation’s arid and semiarid regions would have
significantly more water, reducing problems of water scarcity but perhaps increasing the
threat of floods.122
Faced with conflicting model results, it makes sense to look at real-world data. Andreadis and
Letternmaier (2006) constructed a time series of soil moisture and runoff over the continental United
States for the period from 1925 to 2003. They found that drought duration, severity, and frequency had
increased in the Southwest and parts of the interior of the West, but that most of the country had become
wetter:
Over much of the country, there has been a wetting trend which is reflected in a
predominance of upward trends in both model-derived soil moisture and runoff. These
trends are generally consistent with increases in precipitation during the latter half of the
20th century observed over most of the U.S….Furthermore, trends in the simulated runoff
are similar to those in observed records of streamflow at a set of index stations that have
been minimally affected by anthropogenic activities. Trends in drought characteristics
(duration, frequency, severity, and extent) are similar to those in soil moisture and runoff,
i.e., droughts have, for the most part, become shorter, less frequent, less severe, and cover
a smaller portion of the country over the last century.123

AIT: “In 2005 the Amazon suffered the longest and worst drought in recorded history—
with devastating effects.” (AIT, p. 141)
Comment: RealClimate.Org, a Web site set up to debunk global warming “skeptics,” concludes in a
lengthy post that it is not possible to link the Brazilian drought to global warming or, more specifically,
the warm seas that spawned so many Atlantic hurricanes in 2005:
A quick statistical analysis suggests that SST variability cannot account for all of the
precipitation anomaly over the Amazon (R2 ~ 20% over the Amazon region, e.g. Carauar,
Manaus, & S.Gab. do Cachoeira for the January-November rainfall). Furthermore, the
present SST-based regression models do not give a large reduction in rainfall for 2005. It
is important to keep in mind that more than one factor (e.g. ENSO, local effects) may
affect the rainfall, and extreme events can arise when several conditions coincide in time
and space (e.g. a combination of favorable SST anomalies, atmospheric circulation, local
effects, etc)…In summary, it does not appear possible to say that this single event is
attributable to climate change as the noise in the rainfall statistics is large.124
Unsurprisingly, AIT takes no notice of a beneficial warming-related trend in the Amazon, reported in two
studies. Nemani et al. (2003), analyzing satellite data from 1982 to 1999, found that “global changes in
climate have eased several critical climatic constraints to plant growth, such that net primary production
increased 6%…globally.” The Amazon rain forests accounted for 42% of the observed increase in plant
growth.125 Cao et al. (2004) found similar results.126 As one commentator put it, “In general, where
temperatures restricted plant growth, it got warmer; where sunlight was needed, clouds dissipated; and
where it was too dry, it rained more.”127
AIT fails to make a credible case that global warming is making the weather more dangerous. The
frequency of strong tornadoes in the United States has declined slightly since 1950; increased property
56

  

damages due to floods and storms are chiefly due to socio-economic factors such as development in flood
plains and coastal areas; globally, deaths from extreme weather events have declined by 95 percent or
more since the 1920s; long-term rainfall records for the month of July in Mumbai, India exhibit no
greenhouse warming signal; U.S. CO2 emissions are not to blame for the disappearance of Lake Chad;
U.S. droughts were more severe during the 1930s and the latter half of the 16th century than during recent
decades; Brazil’s 2005 drought has no discernible global warming link; and global warming appears to
have increased the bio-productivity of rainforests throughout the world.

  

57

VIII. Arctic Climate

AIT: “There are two places on Earth that serve as canaries in the coal mine—regions that
are especially sensitive to the effects of global warming,” i.e. the Arctic and the
Antarctic. In the Arctic, “Temperatures are shooting upward there faster than at any other
place on the planet.” (AIT, p. 126)
Comment: We would expect the Arctic to warm more rapidly than most other places during a period of
global warming, regardless of whether the warming is due to rising greenhouse gas concentrations or
natural variability. As Gore explains later on (pages 144-145), polar ice is white and reflects incoming
short-wave radiation from the sun whereas sea water is dark and absorbs it; consequently, when sea ice
melts, the Arctic ocean absorbs more radiant energy, amplifying the initial warming. Conversely, cooling
expands sea ice, producing more cooling. Arctic climate swings!
For example, Polyakov et al. (2003) found that the Arctic (the area poleward of 62°N) was as warm in the
late 1930s as it was at the end of the 20th century.128 See the Figure below.

th

The Arctic in the 1930s was as warm as or warmer than it was in the late 20 century.
Source: Polyakov et al. (2003)

Consistent with Polyakov’s record, Chylek et al. (2006) found that Greenland was as warm during 19201930 as it was during 1995-2005, but that the rate of warming during the earlier decade was “50%
higher.”129

  

59

Greenland in the 1920s-1940s was as warm as or warmer than it was in the past decade.
Source: Chylek et al. (2006)

Going back further in time, three studies reviewed by Patrick Michaels found greater-than-present Arctic
warmth in the early Holocene.130 Briner et al. (2006) found that, 10,000 to 8,500 years ago, Canada’s
Baffin Bay was ~ 5°C warmer than it is today.131 Kaufman et al. (2004) found that, 9,000-7,000 years
ago, northern Russia (including Siberia) was 2-7.5°C warmer than it is today.132 McDonald et al. (2000)
found 120 sites out of 140 in the Arctic Western hemisphere where proxy data indicate warmer-thanpresent conditions during the early Holocene.133 Darby et al. (2001), reviewed by the Center for the Study
of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, found that during the middle Holocene (about 5,000 years ago),
Western Arctic sea surface temperature in August was 3-7°C warmer than it is today.134 A forthcoming
study by Caseldine et al. (2006) finds that from roughly 8,000 to 6,700 years ago, July surface air
temperatures in northern Iceland were at least 1.5°C warmer than the 1961-1990 average and possibly 23°C warmer.135
To sum up, the Arctic warming of the 1930s was comparable to the warming of recent decades, and both
Arctic air and sea surface temperatures were significantly warmer than the present during the early- and
mid-Holocene. Arctic climate is naturally variable—a fact AIT never acknowledges.

AIT: “Three years ago the Ward Hunt shelf cracked in half, to the astonishment of
scientists. This had never happened before.” (AIT, p. 128)

60

  

Crack in the Ward Hunt Shelf

Comment: Gore makes this sound like a portent of doom. The Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide
and Global Change, in a review of Mueller et al. (2003), observes that changes of the same kind had been
under way since the early 20th century, when CO2 concentrations were still fairly close to pre-industrial
levels.136
As noted by Mueller et al. …the Ward Hunt Ice Shelf was merely “a 443 km2 remnant of
a much larger feature that extended along the northern coast of Ellsmere Island at the
beginning of the last century (Peary, 1907).” They report, for example, that the original
ice shelf had already “contracted 90% during the period 1906-1982 by calving from its
northern edge (Vincent et al., 2001)…” So what do we say about the ice shelf’s
demise? We say what Mueler et al. say: “The cumulative effects of a long-term warming
trend since the Little Ice Age (Overpeck et al., 1997) likely caused the ongoing changes
in the Ward Hunt Ice Shelf,” including “the abrupt break-up and loss of integrity that we
observed over the period 2000-2002.”

AIT: “In Alaska these are called ‘drunken trees’ because they are leaning every which way.
And this is caused neither by wind damage nor alcohol consumption. These trees put their
roots deep into the frozen tundra decades—even centuries—ago and now as the tundra
melts they lose their anchor, causing them to sway in all directions.” (AIT, p. 130-131)
Comment: All of Alaska warmed suddenly in 1976 when a natural cycle known as the Pacific Decadal
Oscillation (PDO) shifted from its cooler negative to its warmer positive phase. The Alaska Climate
Research Center (ACRC) shows that there is no linear trend in Alaska temperatures from 1949 to 2005, as
might be expected from the fairly steady increase in CO2 levels during this period. Rather, there were two
slight cooling trends—the first from 1949 to 1975, the second from 1977 to 2001—interrupted by an
overriding step-like warming in 1976 corresponding to the PDO phase shift.137 See the Figure below.

  

61

The 1976 PDO Shift
Source: Alaska Climate Research Center, Temperature Change in Alaska, 1949-2005138

No greenhouse warming computer model has ever been able to simulate the 1976 temperature jump.
Drunken trees may partly be a consequence of the PDO shift.

AIT: “In Siberia, approximately 1 million square km of land frozen since the last ice age
is expected to thaw. This tundra contains 70 billion tons of stored carbon, which is
becoming unstable as the permafrost melts. The carbon in these Siberian soils is 10 times
the amount emitted annually from man-made sources.” (AIT, p. 132)
Comment: A positive feedback effect, whereby warming releases more CO2 from soils, which leads to
more warming, is a possibility. Another possibility is that the range of carbon-storing vegetation will
expand as the tundra thaws. The Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change’s extensive
literature review (17 studies) concludes:
In conclusion, it would appear that all of these many observations suggest that Arctic
tundra ecosystems tend to sequester much more carbon in warm times than in cold times,
and that old fears of runaway global warming fueled by warming-induced increases in
CO2 emissions from Arctic tundra ecosystems are nothing more than that, i.e., old fears
that have no basis in fact.139

AIT: “The graph below shows the number of days each year that the tundra in Alaska is
frozen solidly enough to drive on [more than 200 winter travel days in 1970 down to
fewer than 80 in 2002].” (AIT, p. 135)
Comment: The 1976 PDO shift may account for part of the trend depicted in Gore’s graph.

62

  

AIT: “Since the 1970s, the extent and thickness of the Arctic ice cap has diminished
precipitously. There are studies now showing that if we continue with business as usual, the
Arctic ice cap will completely disappear each year during the summertime.” (AIT, p. 143)
Comment: The graph accompanying these statements shows a decline in Arctic sea-ice area from about
13.7 million km2 in 1970 to about 11.8 million km2 in 2005—a roughly 15% decrease. As usual, Gore
breathes not a word about the potential role of natural variability, but changes in wind patterns and ocean
currents can produce significant changes in Arctic sea ice extent.140 A recent study of sea ice extent in the
Nordic Seas region, which includes the Iceland, Greenland, Norwegian, and Barents seas, noted that “a
similar shrinkage of ice cover was observed in the 1920s–1930s, during the previous warm phase of the
low-frequency oscillation, when any anthropogenic influence is believed to have still been negligible.”141
But let’s assume for the sake of argument that the decrease in Arctic sea ice is mainly due to global
warming from greenhouse gas emissions. How worried should we be about this?
Ice cores, ocean sediment cores, and mammalian bone fragments indicate that, during the early Holocene,
the Canadian Arctic Archipelago had less summer ice than occurs today, according to an article by 10
scientists in the journal EOS.142 For the past 8,900 years, Bearing Sea and Davis Strait stocks of bowhead
whales have been unable to intermingle due to a persistent sea ice barrier separating the two populations.
The barrier existed during the last glaciation but disappeared during the warmth of the early Holocene. At
the height of that warmth, which was about 3°C warmer than now, “the Pacific and Atlantic bowhead
whales could visit each other through the Northwest Passage.”
Again, an obvious question arises. What evidence is there that humanity or other species suffered because
of the extra Arctic warmth in the early Holocene and the consequent reduction in Arctic sea ice? Did the
loss of sea ice make the planet less habitable? Or did warmth actually help our low-tech ancestors survive
and begin the march of civilization?

AIT: “At present, it [the Arctic ice cap] plays a crucial role in cooling the Earth.
Preventing its disappearance must be one of our highest priorities.” (AIT, p. 143)
Comment: Gore cites no references and offers no explanation for this portentous statement. For example,
what harmful effects on weather patterns, global food supplies, or global water supplies can reasonably be
traced to the 15% decrease in Arctic summer sea ice observed since 1970?

AIT: “A new scientific study shows that, for the first time, polar bears have been
drowning in significant numbers.” (AIT, p. 146)
Comment: “Have been drowning” suggests an ongoing process; “significant numbers” suggests a lot of
drowned bears—enough to affect population dynamics. The study in question reports that in September
2004, “4 dead bears were seen floating far offshore,” apparently drowned by “an abrupt wind storm.”143
So the study may have uncovered an unusual case, related to a specific storm, rather than a trend, and the
“significant numbers” turns out to be four.

  

63

Patrick Michaels, analyzing World Wildlife Fund data, found that polar bear populations are increasing in
Arctic areas where it is warming and declining in areas where it is cooling.144 A leading Canadian bear
biologist wrote recently, “Of the 13 populations of polar bears in Canada, 11 are stable or increasing in
number. They are not going extinct, or even appear to be affected at present.”145
What about the future—will polar bears survive if global warming melts the pack ice that the bears use as
a platform for hunting seals and other prey? That is a serious question, and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service has initiated a review to determine whether, due to receding sea ice, the agency should list the
polar bear as “threatened” under the Endangered Species Act.146
But before anyone concludes that polar bears are doomed unless we halt and reverse the ongoing rise in
atmospheric CO2 levels—a feat unattainable absent major technological breakthroughs—a few points
should be kept in mind. Arctic summer temperatures in the early Holocene were significantly warmer
than the present and there was less sea ice, as already noted. More tellingly, Arctic summer temperatures
during the Last Interglacial Period were 4-5°C warmer than the present for thousands of years.147 See the
Figure below. Yet the polar bears managed to survive.

Regional maximum LIG summer Arctic temperature anomalies (ºC) relative to present.
Taken from Cape Project Members (2006).
Source: World Climate Report

Obviously, there was no Endangered Species Act during the Last Interglacial Period or the early
Holocene, nor were there any public or private conservation agencies or programs. The polar bears of the
21st century will have “anthropogenic” advantages in the struggle for survival that their remote ancestors
lacked.

64

  

AIT: Gore suggests that even a mid-range warming of 2.7°C (5°F) would be a planetaryscale disaster: “An increase of five degrees [Fahrenheit] actually means an increase of
only one or two degrees at the Equator, but more than 12° at the North Pole, and a large
increase on the periphery of Antarctica as well.” (AIT, p. 149)
Comment: The temperature record of the past three decades suggests that if global warming continues,
average air temperatures will rise about 1.7°C (3°F) during the 21st century. This implies a polar warming
comparable to the Arctic warmth of the early Holocene. If our Stone Age ancestors survived (and likely
benefited from) that “disaster,” also known as the Holocene Climate Optimum, why should we be afraid?

  

65

IX. Gulf Stream

AIT: Gore describes the functioning of Atlantic branch of the thermohaline circulation
(THC), the oceanic “conveyor belt” that, along with the Gulf Stream, keeps Europe
relatively warm in the wintertime. The sinking of dense (cold and salty) water at the
northern end of the belt pulls warm surface water up towards Europe from the equator.
Gore worries that “the rapid melting of Greenland ice” will decrease the density of North
Atlantic surface water to the point where it sinks too slowly to drive the conveyor.
According to Gore, such an event happened “10,000 years ago,” and “The Gulf Stream
virtually stopped…Consequently, Europe went back into an ice age for another 900 to
1,000 years.” “Some scientists are now seriously worried about the possibility of this
phenomenon recurring.” (AIT, p. 149)

An illustration of the THC “conveyor belt”

Comment: Gore assumes that it is the THC that keeps London and Paris 15-20°F warmer than New York
City during the winter. Richard Seager of Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory and
his colleagues contend that oceanic heat transport is simply not strong enough to account for Europe’s
milder winters. The key factor, they contend, is a difference in the warmth of the prevailing winds that
blow across north-eastern North America and Western Europe. During the winter, “South-westerlies bring
warm maritime air into Europe and north-westerlies bring frigid continental air into north-eastern North
America.”148
If this finding is correct, then Europe should continue to enjoy mild winters even if global warming
weakens the THC. Seager elaborates on this point in a popular treatment of his research:
…I would expect that any slowdown in thermohaline circulation would have a noticeable
but not catastrophic effect on climate. The temperature difference between Europe and
Labrador should remain. Temperatures will not drop to ice age levels, not even to the
levels of the Little Ice Age, the relatively cold period that Europe suffered a few centuries
ago. The North Atlantic will not freeze over, and English Channel ferries will not have to
  

67

plow their way through sea ice….Instead of creating catastrophe in the North Atlantic
region, a slowdown in thermohaline circulation would serve to mitigate the expected
anthropogenic warming!149
Similarly, Seager questions the theory that a shutdown of the THC triggered the Younger Dryas, the miniice age of “10,000 years ago” or so, to which Gore refers. Some scientists have speculated that a sudden
release of fresh water into the Labrador Sea, following the collapse of a giant ice dam in North America,
shut down the THC and caused the Younger Dryas. “But,” says Seager, “the Younger Dryas was not a
purely North Atlantic phenomenon: Manifestations of it also appeared in the tropical and southern
Atlantic, in South America, and in Asia.” Moreover, “evidence has emerged that the Younger Dryas
began long before the breach that allowed freshwater to flood the North Atlantic.”150
Even if a freshening of the North Atlantic did shut down THC thousands of years ago, the recurrence of
such an event today is highly implausible. The rupture of the Laurentide ice dam allowed more than
100,000 cubic kilometers of fresh water to pour into the North Atlantic.151 The rate of fresh water infusion
from Greenland today is a comparative trickle. According to a study in Science, in 2005, Greenland is
shedding ice at a rate of 224±41 cubic kilometers per year.152
Northern Hemisphere climate during the last interglacial period (roughly 130,000 to 118,000 years ago)
was relatively stable, even though Greenland experienced summertime temperatures 4°C-5°C warmer
than the present for several millennia, and even though sea levels rose to several meters higher than
present.153 These conditions may eventually have produced a “deep-water reorganization” that began the
transition to the next ice age—but only after 8,000 years of comparative climate stability.154
Is the THC slowing down? Bryden et al. (2005)155 found that it is, but Meinen et al. (2006)156 and Schott
et al. (2006)157 found that it isn’t. Latif et al. (2006)158 observed a “strengthening” of the THC since 1980.
There certainly is no indication that Europe is cooling due to any modification of the THC.
Finally, Gore conflates the THC with the Gulf Stream. The THC is a convective system driven chiefly by
the sinking of dense (cold and salty) surface water in the high northern latitudes. The Gulf Stream, on the
other hand, is a wind-driven system. It is energized primarily by the Earth’s spin and secondarily by the
lunar tides, not by salinity levels in the oceans. As one scientist put it, the Gulf Stream is safe as long as
the Earth turns and the wind blows.159 Thus, even in climate models that project a weakening of the THC
in the 21st century, Europe continues to warm, “albeit more slowly than the rest of the world.”160

68

  

X. Birds, Beetles, Extinctions

AIT: “The age-old rhythm of the Earth’s seasons—summer, fall, winter, and spring—is
also changing, as some parts of the world heat up more rapidly than others.” (AIT, 152)
Gore cites a study showing that, in the Netherlands, the height of caterpillar hatching
season now arrives two weeks earlier than it did 25 years ago, making it hard for
migratory birds (“tits”), which still arrive at about the same time of year, to find food for
their chicks. “As a result, the chicks are in trouble.” He generalizes: “Global warming is
disrupting millions of delicately balanced ecological relationships among species in just
this way.” (AIT, p. 153)
Comment: Gore says the “chicks are in trouble.” However, the study found that, “The gap between the
schedules of the caterpillars and the birds has had no demonstrable effect so far on tit numbers.”161 Could
it be that migratory birds are more adaptable than Gore imagines? Robins today are thriving in areas of
Alaska and Canada where no robins were seen only a few decades ago.162 Climate change has extended
their range from the southern tip of Mexico to the top of North America. In the case of robins, global
warming is for the birds!

Global warming has expanded the Robins’ habitat 163

AIT: “Another study in National Geographic magazine shows sharp decline in frost days
in southern Switzerland and a simultaneous sharp increase in invasive alien species that
have rushed in to fill the newly created ecological niches.” (AIT, p. 154)
Comment: To illustrate this point, Gore reproduces the graph on the left side of the Figure, below.164
However, he does not include the picture on the right side, nor the text at the bottom. The term “invasive
alien species” can conjure up scary images of pests and weeds. In the study to which Gore refers, the
“invasive” species are evergreen broad-leaved shrubs and trees.

  

69

The species “invading” Switzerland are evergreen broad-leafed plants deliberately planted in
Swiss parks and gardens as long as 200 years ago.
Source: Walther et al. (2002)

In their review of this study (or more precisely, the study on which it is based165), Sherwood, Craig and
Keith Idso point out that all of the ‘invaders’ were deliberately introduced by people who took a fancy to
‘exotic’ plants:
The invading species were imported from relatively warmer places such as Africa, the
Far East and Australia. For more than 200 years these ornamental woody plants were
grown in Swiss gardens and parks. Within the latter half of the 20th century, however,
many of them began to spring up in adjacent natural habitat, becoming especially
competitive over the last thirty years. The author attributes this phenomenon to
concurrent warming. It is clear, however, that were the alien species not introduced to the
region by human transplantation in the first place, this particular type of opportunistic
ecosystem reorganization would not be occurring.166
The deliberate and inadvertent human introduction of non-native plants and animals is an “anthropogenic
disturbance” associated with trade and tourism. It is reasonable to assume that since 1900, trade and
tourism in Europe increased at least as much as the number of frost days decreased.
Also, even if a decline in frost days is creating ecological niches for non-native species, the decline may
primarily be due to expanding urban heat islands rather than to rising CO2 concentrations. Consider these
findings from a study of climate change and vegetation in central European cities:
In big cities, the effects of global climate warming since the 1850s have been exacerbated
by the heat-island effect. Berlin grew from a city of about 170,000 inhabitants in 1800 to
a metropolitan area with 3.7 million inhabitants in 1910. Calculations of the increased
warming effect of the urban climate are 0.2°C for 1798–1804, 0.7°C for 1831 to 1837,
and 1.4°C for 1886 to 1898 (annual mean temperatures). For the period 1961 to 1980,
there was a difference in the annual mean air temperature of more than 2°C between the
center of Berlin and the surrounding areas. This warming correlates with a significant
70

  

reduction of frost days: < 64 days in the center of the city; > 102 days in the surrounding
areas (Stülpnagel et al., 1990). Consequently, in Berlin, an accelerated invasion of
nonnative species that tolerate higher temperatures could be expected.167
To put these numbers in perspective, the IPCC estimates that the world warmed about 0.6°C during the
20th century. In contrast, Berlin warmed by roughly the same amount during 1831 to 1837, by roughly
twice that amount during 1886 to 1898, and by roughly three times that amount during 1961 to 1980. The
ecological niches for invasive species global warming may be opening likely pale in comparison to those
created by urbanization and population growth.

AIT: Gore reports that as frost days in the American West have declined, the spread of
pine beetles and other pests has increased. (AIT, p. 154)
Comment: Gore fails to consider the role of plain old mismanagement or lack of management. Colorado
State University’s Cooperative Extension program offers this interesting advice: “In general, the MPB
[Mountain Pine Beetle] likes forests that are old and dense. Thinning out excess trees reduces forest density,
lessens fire hazard and improves individual tree vigor. Most mature Colorado forests have about twice as
many trees as forests more resistant to MPB. Get help from a forester with this option.”168 Indeed, compared
to increases in forest density, climate change is likely a minor contributor to beetle infestations. According
to Kloor (2000), pine forests in the Western United States had an average of 57 trees per hectare in 1876, but
now contain as many as 2,100 trees per hectare.169 This dramatic increase in forest productivity is a good
thing. However, if densely packed forests are not prudently managed, they become vulnerable to pests,
disease, and catastrophic fires.
Gore also fails to acknowledge the environmental movement’s responsibility for beetle infestations.
Rachel Carson’s 1962 book, Silent Spring, warned that use of the pesticide DDT would cause a cancer
epidemic. As journalist John Berlau documents, science has never found a link between DDT and cancer,
no human being has ever been harmed by using DDT as directed, and DDT has saved millions of human
lives.170 Nonetheless, Carson succeeded in demonizing DDT as an “agent of death.” Her book made
chemo-phobia and even techno-phobia respectable, setting the stage for the modern environmental
movement. Gore praises Silent Spring as one of the seminal influences shaping his development as an
environmentalist (AIT, p. 124).
In addition to suppressing mosquitoes and malaria, DDT was also highly effective in protecting trees
from beetle infestations. As Berlau explains, in the late 1940s and 1950s, DDT rescued American elm
trees from Dutch elm disease, a fungus spread by elm bark beetles. But Carson’s book caused U.S.
policymakers to restrict and, in late 1972, ban the use of DDT. The ban brought the beetles and Dutch elm
disease back with a vengeance, destroying more than half of U.S. elm trees in recent decades. “Other tree
species also suffered in the wake of the Government’s DDT restrictions and eventual ban,” Berlau
comments, including Douglas fir trees and oaks.171
It is doubtful that Gore’s preferred global warming “solutions”—ratifying the Kyoto Protocol, installing
energy-efficient appliances, driving less, buying food grown locally, etc.—would save even one tree from
beetle infestations over the next 50 years. In contrast, prudent forest management (including the use of
pesticides and fungicides) might save millions of trees—and cost a lot less than Kyoto.

  

71

AIT: “We are facing what biologists are beginning to describe as a mass extinction crisis,
with a rate of extinction now 1,000 times higher than the normal background rate.”
(AIT, p. 163)
Comment: Gore does not tell us what the “natural background” extinction rate is, how it is ascertained,
or upon what evidence the estimated 1000-fold increase is based. With estimates of the actual number of
species ranging from 2 million to 100 million, this whole subject is fraught with uncertainty and
guesswork.172
Claims of a warming-induced “mass extinction crisis” do not survive inspection. Consider the vaunted
study in Nature by Thomas et al. (2004), who predicted that climate change could wipe out up to a quarter
of all terrestrial plant and animals species by 2054.173 As Patrick Michaels points out, if the relationship
that Thomas et al. posit between species extinction and global temperature increases were valid, then the
roughly 0.8°C temperature increase that occurred since the late 19th century would already have wiped out
hundreds of thousands of species. “Yet nowhere is there evidence for such occurrences.”174
Extinction alarmists assume that the observed relationship between habitat loss and species loss on small
islands holds for much larger land areas. Hence they suppose that any reduction in “species area,”
whether due to deforestation or climate change, will result in a corresponding number of extinctions. The
data tell a different story, as Bjorn Lomborg explains:
If islands get smaller, there is nowhere to escape. If, on the other hand, one tract of
rainforest is cut down, many animals and plants can go on living in the surrounding areas.
One obvious thing to do would be to look at our own experiment, the one carried out in
Europe and North America. In both places, primary forest was reduced by approximately
98-99 percent. In the U.S., the eastern forests were reduced over two centuries to
fragments totaling just 1-2 percent of their original area, but nonetheless this resulted in
the extinction of one only forest bird.175
Similarly, notes Lomborg, not one land animal species perished because Brazil deforested its Atlantic
coast:
Brazil’s Atlantic rainforest had been almost entirely cleared in the nineteenth century,
with only 12 percent extremely fragmented forest left. According to [biologist E.O.]
Wilson’s rule of thumb, one ought to expect half of all species to have become extinct.
However, when members of the Brazilian Society of Zoology analyzed all 171 known
Atlantic forest animals, the group “could not find a single known animal species which
could properly be declared as extinct, in spite of the massive reduction in area and
fragmentation of the habitat.”176
The same issue of Nature that carried the Thomas et al. study also featured a study by Alan Pounds and
Robert Puschendorf that blames global warming for the extinction of several frog species in Costa Rica. This
was a hard case to make, because annual Costa Rican temperatures have remained remarkably flat since
1979. Frogs in Costa Rica were dying not from the heat but from a fungal infection carried by tiny organisms
known as chytrids. Pounds and Puschendorf argued that global warming increases cloud cover, thereby
limiting the frogs’ exposure to sunlight, a natural disinfectant that “can rid the frogs of this fungus.”177
Patrick Michaels identified three problems with this supposed chain of causality. First, there is no
established correlation between global warming and cloud cover. Second, there was no observed change
72

  

in Central American cloud cover from 1987 to 2001. Third, there is evidence that humans—possibly ecotourists or researchers—introduced the chytrid fungus into the area, exposing the frogs to an unfamiliar
pathogen.178
Nowhere in AIT does Gore acknowledge the ecological benefits of CO2 emissions (just as he never
acknowledges the linkages between fossil energy, economic growth, and human welfare). Ecosystem
species richness is more highly correlated with ecosystem bio-productivity than with any other single
factor. “It readily follows, therefore,” comments the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global
Change, “that anything that enhances ecosystem primary production should also enhance ecosystem
biodiversity; and that is precisely what atmospheric CO2 enrichment does, as has been demonstrated in
numerous laboratory and field experiments…”179
Literally hundreds of studies show that in CO2-enriched environments, most trees, crops, and other plants
grow faster and larger, produce more fruit, and utilize water more efficiently. What is more, elevated CO2
levels not only boost plant productivity but also raise the optimum temperature of plant productivity.180
See the Figure below.

Warmth boosts plant productivity in CO2-enriched environments.
Source: Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change

Since all animals depend on plants, directly or indirectly, as a food source, rising CO2 levels nourish the
entire biosphere.

  

73

XI. Coral Reefs

AIT: “Many factors contribute to the death of coral reefs—pollution from nearby shores,
destructive dynamite fishing in less developed regions, and more acidic ocean waters.
However, the most deadly cause of the recent, rapid, and unprecedented deterioration of
coral reefs is believed by scientists to be higher ocean temperatures due to global
warming.” (AIT, p. 164)
Comment: The deteriorating condition of coral reefs predates by decades any significant warming from
greenhouse gases. Pandolfi et al. (2003), a team of a dozen biologists who surveyed 14 of the earth’s
major reef systems, found that “most…were substantially degraded before 1900,” and that “all of the
reefs in our survey were substantially degraded long before the first observations of mass mortality
resulting from bleaching and outbreaks of disease.”181 Corals could probably survive and even thrive in a
warming world if they were not weakened and traumatized by pollution, sediment loading, and a host of
other local insults.
As the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change points out, the scleractinian corals,
which are today’s main reef builders, emerged in the mid-Triassic Period, when the Earth was
“considerably warmer” than today, and thrived “throughout the Cretaceous, even when temperatures were
10-15°C higher than at present.”182 During the Paleocene/Eocene thermal maximum of ~55 million years
ago, Arctic sea surface temperatures reached 24°C (75°F),183 implying much warmer-than-present SSTs
in the tropical oceans. Gore’s own graph on pages 66-67 shows that all four previous interglacial periods
were warmer than the one in which we are now living. Analysis of coral skeletal remains from Australia’s
Great Barrier Reef indicates that the tropical ocean about 5,350 years ago was 1.2°C warmer than the
mean for the early 1990s.184 In short, today’s coral species have been around for 200 million years and
survived countless changes in the global environment. If global warming were the coral killer Gore makes
it out to be, coral would have become extinct long ago.
It is far from clear that warming per se is bad for coral. One study “suggests that ocean warming will foster
considerably faster future rates of coral reef growth that will eventually exceed pre-industrial rates by as
much as 35 percent in 2100,” according to lead author Ben McNeil, an oceanographer at the University of
New South Wales.185 McNeil is not talking about a trivial amount of warming but a hefty 3.2°C increase in
annual mean sea temperatures at coral reefs during the period from 1950 to 2100. In addition to more robust
coral growth, the study also predicts that warming will expand coral’s habitat range.

AIT: “In 2005, to date the hottest year on record, there was a massive loss of coral reefs,
including some that were healthy and thriving when Columbus first arrived in the
Caribbean.” (AIT, p. 164)
Comment: Gore lists no source for the claim of massive coral loss in 2005. He neglects to ask whether
coral that were healthy and thriving in 1492 were still in good shape before recent increases in SSTs.

AIT: “In 1998, the second hottest year on record, the world lost an estimated 16% of all
its coral reefs.” (AIT, p. 164)
  

75

Comment: AIT does not mention that 1998 was the year of an unusually strong El Nino, the warm phase
of a naturally recurring ocean cycle.186 Although 16% of the world’s reefs were seriously damaged in
1998, by 2003 about 40% of the damaged reefs were either “recovering well” or had “fully recovered,”
according to Status of Coral Reefs of the World: 2004 (pp. 7-8).187 Corals are more resilient than Gore
seems to realize.

AIT: “The link between global warming and the large-scale bleaching of corals, considered
controversial only 10 to 15 years ago, is now universally accepted.” (AIT, p. 166)
Comment: Corals are communities of tiny organisms—polyps—that live symbiotically with micro-algae
that supply them with energy, nutrients, and color. Almost any adverse change in water temperature (too
cold as well as too warm), chemistry (not salty enough), or quality (too murky) can cause the polyps to
eject their symbiotic algae, “bleaching” the coral. But coral bleaching is not the same as coral death.
Bleaching can be an opportunity for polyps to “switch partners,” to recruit new symbionts better adapted
to changed environmental conditions. Patrick Michaels comments:188
Now, two new papers in Science add further evidence that corals must not be as “fragile”
as certain senators might hope. Cynthia Lewis and Mary Coffroth of SUNY-Buffalo
bleached Caribbean corals and exposed them to certain Symbiodinium genotypes for six
weeks. The corals not only re-established symbiotic relationships with the algae, but in
some cases they changed algae species, giving the corals a unique opportunity to select
symbionts based upon the environmental conditions.
The second Science paper, by Angela Little and two coauthors from Townsville,
Australia, looked at changing symbiotic relationships over the lifetime of the corals. They
found that young juvenile corals tended to interact with different Symbiodinium strains
than did adults, which ‘suggests that there maybe ‘active’ selection by the host to
maximize symbiont effectiveness that varies with differences in physiological
requirements between juvenile and adult corals.
Michaels concludes: “While coral bleaching appears to be mass suicide to uninformed senators, it could
actually be an excellent adaptive strategy that has allowed the species to survive for millions of years.”

AIT: Gore worries that rising CO2 levels in the air will increase carbonic acid levels in
seawater, which in turn will decrease levels of calcium carbonate—the raw material coral
polyps use to build reefs. He presents a chart showing that all optimal areas for reef
construction will disappear by 2050 “if we allow the doubling of pre-industrial CO2 levels—
which will occur within 45 years unless we do something about it.” (AIT, p. 169)
Comment: The claim that all optimal areas for reef construction will disappear if CO2 concentrations
reach a doubling of pre-industrial levels is not plausible. As noted above, the scleractinian corals emerged
during the Mid-Triassic Period and thrived during the Cretaceous Period. During those periods,
atmospheric CO2 levels were several times current concentrations. See the Figure below.

76

  

CO2 levels and average global temperatures over geologic time
Source: Monte Hieb189

Given this history, how plausible is it that raising CO2 concentrations to 560 ppm—roughly double preindustrial levels—would make the oceans almost uninhabitable for corals?
The source of Gore’s gloomy forecast is the U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP).190 The
USGCRP’s source, in turn, is Kleypas et al. (1999), which predicts declining coral calcification rates from
1880 to 2050.191 The Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change reviewed the literature on
CO2-induced changes in carbonate levels, including Kleypas et al., and found that “none [of the studies] deal
with living organisms, and, therefore, that none of them deal with the actual calcification process as driven
by life processes. Rather, they deal exclusively with the lifeless world of chemistry and thermodynamics.”192
Accordingly, the Center also reviewed the marine biology literature on coral calcification. These studies
find that coral calcification rates have increased as SSTs and CO2 levels have risen. Three factors appear
to be at work: (1) warmth promotes coral calcification; (2) higher CO2 levels boost coral-symbiont
photosynthesis; and (3) CO2-stimulated bio-productivity raises marine pH levels, mitigating the effects of
CO2-induced increases in carbonic acid.
One excerpt from the Center’s long review article must suffice to show that AIT does not present a
balanced view of the science:
Another pair of scientists to address the subject was Bessat and Buigues (2001),193 who worked
with a core retrieved from a massive Porites coral on the French Polynesian island of Moorea that
covered the period 1801-1990, saying they undertook the study because they thought it “may
provide information about long-term variability in the performance of coral reefs, allowing
unnatural changes to be distinguished from natural variability.” This effort revealed that a 1°C
increase in water temperature increased coral calcification rate by 4.5%, and that “instead of a 614% decline in calcification over the past 100 years computed by the Kleypas group, the
calcification has increased.” They also observed patterns of “jumps or stages” in the record, which
were characterized by an increase in the annual rate of calcification, particularly at the beginning of
the past century “and in a more marked way around 1940, 1960 and 1976,” stating once again that
their results “do not confirm those predicted by the Kleypas et al. (1999) model…”
  

77

XII. Algae, Ticks, Mosquitoes, and Germs

AIT: “We are changing the chemistry of our oceans in many ways, all over the world. As
a result, there are many new ‘dead zones’ devoid of ocean life. Some are caused by the
appearance of algae blooms in warmer waters fed by pollution coming from human
activities on the shore. Many of these algae blooms have grown to spectacular and totally
unprecedented levels in several places. In the Baltic Sea, for example, many resorts had
to be closed in the summer of 2005 as a result of algae. Florida’s red tide represents a
similar phenomenon.” To illustrate these remarks, Gore presents three photographs, taken
in the summer of 2005, of blue-green algae blooms at Gotland, Sweden. A similar photo
appears below. Gore concludes by saying, “Algae is just one of the disease vectors that
have been increasing because of global warming.” (AIT, p. 170-172)

Blue-Green algae blooms in the Baltic Sea, Summer 2005

Comment: A global warming link to toxic algae blooms is plausible, because algae-forming bacteria only
produce blooms in warm water. But global warming is at most an aggravating factor. Mass fish kills
associated with red tide algae blooms have been reported in Florida for hundreds of years. Indeed, reports
the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, “There is evidence that red tides have always
existed in Florida’s waters. Scientists who study red tides globally consider Florida red tides to be unique
because they are natural events which existed long before Florida was settled.”194 Similarly, dead zones
are naturally occurring phenomena in the Baltic Sea, which has had algae blooms since the last ice age, as
shown by sediment cores.195 In both the Baltic Sea and the Florida coast, sea surface temperatures in late
summer are naturally high enough to support algae blooms, with or without global warming.
Moreover, warmth alone does not produce algae blooms. The water must be sufficiently salty, which in
turn depends on wind patterns and precipitation levels. The Baltic Sea is the world’s largest brackish
water body. Whether or not Cyanobacteria produce blue-green algae blooms during the summer depends
in part on how much salty water blew in during the winter through the narrow Kattegat Strait.196
Similarly, in Florida, red tide blooms penetrate into bays and estuaries only in drought years with higherthan-normal salinity.197
  

79

Wind—or its absence—has an even more direct effect on blue-green algae levels in the Baltic. The
Cyanobacteria cells have air bladders that allow them to drift slowly to the surface. Strong winds churn
the water, inhibiting bacterial reproduction at the surface or breaking up the blooms.198 There is no known
relationship between global warming and calm weather.
Surprisingly, warmth can sometimes prevent red tide algae blooms. This happens when shallow water
heated by the sun forms a layer of less dense, warm surface water that traps the red-tide bacteria (Karenia
brevis) in the cooler bottom layer.199
A major cause of blue-green algae blooms in the Baltic is nutrient loading, especially phosphorus loading,
from agricultural runoff and sewage. In March 2006, an international panel of experts, commissioned by
the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency, issued a report, Eutrophication of the Swedish Seas.200
The panel was “extremely concerned and surprised that little or no significant progress has been made by
the Baltic countries, in aggregate, to reduce riverine P [phosphorus] loading of the Baltic over the last 30
years.” As a consequence, surface water concentrations of dissolved inorganic phosphorus (DIP) have
trended upwards since the 1950s and also in the past decade. DIP concentrations were at record levels in
2005—the year of the algae blooms shown in AIT’s photographs. See Figure below.

Paradoxically, regulatory controls to reduce atmospheric nitrogen deposition and nitrogen discharges
from waste-water-treatment plants also contributed to the algae bloom eruption. The regulations reduced
the ratio of dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN) to DIP. This is significant because the Cyanobacteria,
unlike most phytoplankton, are nitrogen fixers, i.e., they obtain nitrogen directly from the air.
Consequently, lower levels of DIN allow them to “out-compete” other algae species. The combination of
low DIN levels and high DIP levels explains much of the recent increase in algae blooms. In the expert
panel’s words:
In the early 1970s DIN:DIP ratios were as low as in 2004 and 2005 (Figure 3.3), but winter DIP
concentrations in 2004-05 were approximately double the DIP concentrations in the 1970s so the
residual DIP after the spring bloom will be twice as high. Consequently, the historic highs in
Cyanobacteria blooms in the last few years are not surprising.
The Figure below shows the low DIN to DIP ratio in 2005.
80

  

Also contributing to the recent increase in algae blooms, according to the expert panel, are “increased
inflows of saline water through the Kattegat, which displaces deep water in the Baltic Proper, transporting
more saline and phosphorus-rich water to the surface.” See the Figure below.

In short, since Cyanobacteria levels in the Baltic are linked to high DIP levels, low DIN to DIP ratios, and
increased influx of salty water, it is unclear what role if any anthropogenic global warming played in
producing the algae blooms pictured on pages 170-171 of Gore’s book.

AIT: “And when these vectors—whether algae, mosquitoes, ticks, or other germ-carrying life
forms—start to show up in new areas and cover a wider range, they are more likely to interact
with people, and the diseases they carry become more serious threats.” (AIT, p. 172)
Comment: Several responses are in order here. First, societal factors typically overwhelm climatic
factors in determining people’s risk of exposure to “germ-carrying life forms.” For example, between
  

81

1980 and 2003, Florida’s coastal population grew by 75%.201 Between 1960 and 2010, Florida’s coastal
population is projected by grow by 226%.202 Because of these gigantic population increases, more people
are likely to “interact with” red tide algae blooms. Compared to this extraordinary demographic shift, the
contribution of global warming to the potential population at risk of exposure is likely to be small.
Moreover, whether anybody actually is exposed depends on whether individual bathers heed or ignore red
tide advisories and warning signs at the beach.

Second, Gore fosters the impression that global warming can only be good for bad things (algae, ticks)
and bad for good things (polar bears, migratory birds).203 That is nature re-imagined as a morality play. A
warmer, wetter, more bio-productive world will be good for many species, not just the icky ones. Nor is it
always the case that bad things thrive in a warmer world. Estrada-Peña (2003) found that, during 1980 to
2000, temperature increases contributed to a “clear decrease” in the habitat of four tick species that are
major vectors of livestock pathogens in South Africa.204
Third, Gore confuses correlation with causation. There are more cases of tick-borne disease (TBD), and the
world is getting warmer. However, that is not scientific evidence of a warming-TBD link. Sarah Randolph
of Oxford University’s Zoology Department set out to test whether climatic factors account for TBD
increases in Europe during the past two decades.205 Beginning with methodological issues, she found that
current science lacks “fully functional tick population and pathogen transmission models,” leading her to
conclude that, “it is not yet possible to predict whether the incidence of any tick-borne disease will increase
or decrease at actual levels of climate change in any one place.”
Looking at real-world data, she found that tick-borne diseases increased markedly in some countries in
certain years but fell significantly in other countries in other years, with no apparent correlation to
climatic conditions. One factor that did appear to be significant was the increasing population density of
the roe deer, a principal host for ticks, across most of Europe. As the Center for the Study of Carbon
Dioxide and Global Change summarizes:
“Data from Denmark,” in Randolph’s words, “offer the best documented evidence for the
impact of increasing densities of deer on both temporal and spatial variation in the rise of a
tick-borne disease in Europe, this time Lyme borreliosis [LB] (Jensen and Frandsen, 2000;
Jensen et al., 2000).” From 1984 to 1998, for example, Randolph notes that “an increase in
LB paralleled an increase in deer density,” and that “spatial variation in tick density across
35 sites in 1996, and in LB cases across 12 countries in 1993-95, was also correlated with
deer density,” which “accords with the seminal role attributed to white-tailed deer in the
emergence of LB in the USA (Spielman et al., 1985; Wilson et al., 1985).”

82

  

In other words, the trail of evidence leads to Bambi, not global warming.

AIT: “In Kenya, also on the Equator, I heard growing concerns about the increased threat
from mosquitoes and the diseases they can transmit in higher altitudes that were formerly
too cold for them to inhabit.” (AIT, p.141)
Comment: This implies that malaria is a newcomer to Kenya, unknown in that country until recent global
warming. In reality, as a World Health Organization report shows, malaria was a common scourge in
Nairobi during the 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s, with major outbreaks occurring in 1926 and 1938.206 The
Figure below shows the number of outpatient malaria treatments at two Nairobi medical facilities during
the 1920s and 1930s.

Outpatient treatments for malaria as recorded at the General and Railways dispensary in Nairobi between 1925 and 1938.
Source: Snow et al. (1999)

Malaria is primarily a disease of poverty, not of climate. Malaria outbreaks were common in such
northerly climes as Minnesota, Canada, Britain, Scandinavia, and Russia during the 19th century, when
average global temperatures were cooler than today.207 The resurgence of malaria in some developing
countries is chiefly due to decreased spraying of homes with DDT, anti-malarial drug resistance,208 and
incompetent public health programs, not to any ascertainable changes in climate.209
Moreover, even if global warming contributes to malaria risk by accelerating mosquito-breeding cycles or
expanding mosquito habitat range, this would not justify growth-chilling controls on energy use. It is
much more effective to attack malaria risk directly than to address it indirectly via weather modification.
As economist Indur Goklany explains, a Kyoto-type approach might reduce the total population at risk for
  

83

malaria by 2.8% in 2080 at a cost of $250 billion per year. In contrast, malaria’s current yearly death toll
of about 1 million could be cut in half at an annual cost of about $1.25 billion through a combination of
proven measures including spraying with insecticides, window screens, bed nets, better case management,
and more comprehensive medical care.210
AIT: “Some 30 so-called new diseases have emerged over the last 30 years. And some
old diseases that had been under control are now surging again.” (AIT, p. 174)
Comment: Gore does not even attempt to link these “new” diseases to global warming, although he
clearly wants readers to imagine such a nexus. Again, correlation is not causation. Keyboard use has also
increased during the past 30 years, yet this does not establish a link between personal computers and
emerging diseases.

AIT: “One example is the West Nile virus, which entered the United States on the eastern
shore of Maryland in 1999 and within two years crossed the Mississippi. Two years after
that, West Nile spread all the way across the continent.” (AIT, p. 175)
Comment: West Nile virus spread rapidly because the principal carriers of the disease, birds and
mosquitoes, are mobile and plentiful in the United States. Risk of infection could be reduced by
systematic use of pesticides, to wipe out the mosquitoes—an option fiercely opposed by some green
pressure groups.211
Ironically, the speed with which West Nile spread is evidence that global warming had nothing to do with
its transmission. The North American continent contains nearly all the climate types of the world—from
hot, dry deserts, to boreal forests, to frigid tundra—a range that dwarfs any small alteration in
temperatures or precipitation that may be related to greenhouse gas emissions. The virus could not have
spread so far so fast, if it were climate-sensitive.

84

  

XIII. Antarctica: Penguins, Ice Shelves, and Sea-Level Rise

AIT: Gore now turns to Antarctica, the “second canary in the coal mine.” He faults the
movie, March of the Penguins, for “thinking that the biggest challenge facing
Antarctica’s Emperor penguins is their icy cold habitat.” According to Gore, “Scientists
studying Emperor Penguins at the colony featured in the film found that their numbers
have dropped by 70% since the 1960s. The likely culprit: global climate change.” Global
warming, he argues, weakens the ice, making it “more likely to break apart and drift out
to sea, taking the penguins’ eggs and chicks with it.” (AIT, p. 178)
Comment: This is misleading at best. Gore gives the impression that Emperor penguins are in peril, their
numbers falling as the world warms. He provides no reference but his source appears to be a study by
Christophe Barbraud and Henri Weimerskirch, published in Nature.212 Barbraud and Weimerskirch found
that Antarctica’s emperor penguin population “declined abruptly by 50% in the late 1970s and has
stabilized since.” Their data indicates that stabilization occurred around 1989. See the Figure below.

To say that the population dropped “since the 1960s” is accurate but so imprecise as to convey a false
picture. There was a population decline in the 1970s but population has been stable since the late 1980s—
a period of rising CO2 concentrations and generally increasing global temperatures.
Gore attributes the population decline “since the 1960s” to ice breaking off and carrying penguin eggs and
chicks out to sea. Barbraud and Weimerskirch say that “complete or extensive breeding failures in some
years resulted from early break-out of the sea-ice holding up the colony,” but their source is a study
published in 1974. If this is an ongoing recurrent threat, as Gore suggests, why has the population been
stable rather than declining over the past decade and a half?
Whereas Gore presents reduced pack ice as an unmitigated disaster for Emperor penguins, Barbraud and
Weimerskirch found a partially offsetting benefit. If there is less ice, penguins do not have to travel as far
from the colony to the feeding ground. In a similar vein, Ainley et al. (2003) found that as ice shelves
retreat, “extensive coastlines are available to be colonized and even re-colonized—about half the
Antarctica circumference,” which may be one reason most colonies of Adélie penguins are increasing.213
  

85

Oddly, Gore does not mention what Barbraud and Weimerskirch consider the main cause of the 1970s
population decline—a reduction in the birds’ food supply. They reason as follows. The penguins’ diet
mostly consists of krill. Krill breed under ice. Sea surface temperatures around Antarctica were
anomalously high in the 1970s. Warmer seas meant less ice, hence less krill for the birds to eat. This is
non-testable speculation. Nobody observed a reduction in the birds’ food supply during the 1970s. Ainley
et al. (2003) note that penguin diets consist not only of krill but also of fish and squid, and “the species
adjusts its diet based on prey availability.”
Nowhere do Barbraud and Weimerskirch state in their study that global warming caused the high SSTs
assumed to have decreased the birds’ food supply. Weimerskirch told National Geographic that he
“thinks” global warming was “probably” the cause. But as National Geographic explains, there is no way
to tell: “Whether it was the result of natural climate variability in the Antarctic circumpolar wave cycle or
an anomaly related to global warming is not possible to determine because air and sea surface temperature
data from many years ago are not available.”214
What else might have reduced the Emperor penguin population in the late 1970s? According to one
source, “Human disturbance may have been involved in the c.50% decrease in [Emperor Penguin]
breeding populations in the Ross Sea sector.”215 Almost any human activity near or around a penguin
colony—including tourism, use of motorized vehicles, and scientific research—“has the potential to cause
mortality, reduction of reproductive success, and/or degradation of the nesting area.” Patrick Michaels
elaborates:
Perhaps it’s worth noting that the period of rapid decline in population coincides with the
development of Antarctic “ecotourism,” which means people visiting the rookeries as well
as buzzing them in airplanes. Remember, the biggest thing these birds have seen in their
tens of millions of years of evolutionary history is an albatross. A large airliner or a gaggle
of tourists might cause quite a stir, moving them off their nests long enough to induce
increased mortality. It’s easy to freeze an egg at Antarctic temperatures, and we know
which must come first: the egg, not the penguin!216

A possible cause of penguin population decline in the early 1970s

86

  

AIT: Gore presents a map showing the Antarctic Peninsula. “Each [dated, green] splotch
represents an ice shelf the size of Rhode Island or larger that has broken up since
[scientist John] Mercer issued his warning [in 1978].” (AIT, pp. 181-182)
See Figure below.

Comment: “The size of Rhode Island or larger” sounds very big, hence very scary—until you recall that
Rhode Island is the smallest State. Since 1978, the Antarctic Peninsula lost ice shelves totaling over 4,825
square miles.217 That represents 1/55th the area of Texas (268,601 square miles), and falls short of the
State’s water area (6,687 square miles).218 Rhode Island, at 1,214 square miles, is not even 1/220th the size
of Texas. Imagine the impact on audiences had Gore said, “Each splotch represents an ice shelf 1/220th
the size of Texas.”

AIT: “Scientists thought this ice shelf [Larson-B] would be stable for another century—
even with global warming….They had thought the meltwater sank into the ice and
refroze. Instead, as they now know, the water keeps sinking down and makes the ice mass
look like Swiss cheese.” (AIT, p. 183)
Comment: Again, some perspective is in order. The Larson-B ice shelf that broke up during January 31,
2002 to March 5, 2002 covered an area of 1,460 miles. Scientists overestimated the stability of an ice
shelf 1/246th the size of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (360,000 square miles).219
More importantly, research by Carol Pudsey of the British Antarctic Survey and three colleagues
indicates that the breakup of the Larson-B and other Antarctic Peninsula ice shelves is not unprecedented.
The Pudsey team examined the region’s ice shelf history from “petrographic foraminiferal evidence”
(fossils of tiny marine animals in rock sediments). Their data indicate that there was a “widespread ice
shelf breakup in the mid-Holocene.” This finding “suggests that the recent decay may not result entirely
  

87

from anthropogenic climate perturbations.” Thus, contrary to the impression Gore gives, that the LarsonB was stable until Man started to tamper with the climate, Pudsey and her colleagues note that, “the
maximum ice shelf limit may date only from the Little Ice Age.” Patrick Michaels comments:
The work of Carole Pudsey and her colleagues contributes to a growing body of literature
that makes clear the idea that the greatest extent of the Larsen ice shelf during the current
interglacial period occurred only a few hundred years ago. The ice shelves that have
recently disintegrated were likely created at about that same time, meaning that
previously they did not exist. The recurring conclusion is that the recent global warming
may not be unprecedented, and that a significant portion of the warming may be
natural.220

AIT: “Once the sea-based ice shelf was gone, the land-based ice behind it that was being
held back began to shift and fall into the sea. This, too, was unexpected and carries
important implications because ice—whether in the form of a mountain glacier or a landbased ice shelf in Antarctica or Greenland—raises the sea level when it melts or falls into
the sea.” (AIT, p. 184)
Comment: The break-off of floating ice shelves accelerates the flow of land-based ice behind them;
however, this does not mean the larger structure is unraveling or about to do so. A recent literature review
in Science noted that the collapse of the Larson-B ice shelf “was followed by speedup of its major
tributary glaciers, by twofold to eightfold where they entered the former ice shelf,” but also that the
speedup was no longer observable beyond about 10 km inland, that “slight decelerations” occurred “only
1 year later,” and hence that “these events may just represent fast adjustments to marginal fluctuations.”
The study concludes that, “The recent glacier accelerations are too young…and the observational record
is too short to evaluate whether they represent short-term fluctuations or are part of a longer term trend
that might scale with future climatic warming.”221 The article estimates that the accelerated glacier flow
after the Ross-B breakup “contributed about 0.07mm/year to sea-level rise”—equivalent to less than 0.3
inches in a century.

AIT: “Many residents of low-lying Pacific Island nations have already had to evacuate
their homes because of rising seas.” (AIT p. 186)
Comment: The two-page photograph accompanying this statement is titled “High Tide in Funafuti,
Tuvalu, Polynesia.” The photo doesn’t jibe with the text. It shows a young boy playing in the water, while
his mother, unperturbed by the wave crashing a few feet from her workbench, washes clothes and tends to
baby sister. Nobody is fleeing from anything in this picture.
More importantly, tide gauge records show that sea levels at Tuvalu fell during the latter half of the 20th
century. Altimetry data from the Topex-Poseiden satellite show that Tuvalu sea levels fell even during the
1990s, touted by the IPCC as the warmest decade in a thousand years.222 Tuvalu, at 179E longitude and
8S latitude, is smack dab in the central blue areas where sea levels fell.

88

  

Source: Cabanes et al. (2001).

AIT: “The Thames River, which flows through London, is a tidal river. In recent decades,
higher sea levels began to cause more damage during storm surges, so a quarter of a
century ago, the city built these barricades that can be closed for protection.” Gore
presents a graph showing that annual closures of the Thames barriers increased in recent
years. (AIT, pp. 188-189)
  

89

Comment: Recent increases in the annual number of Thames barrier closings are not evidence of
increased flood risk due to global warming-induced sea-level rise.
To begin with, in recent years authorities have closed the barriers to keep water in the Thames as well as
keep tidal surges out. As the U.K. Department of Environment, Food, and Rural Affairs explains:
Because the Thames River Barrier is now subject to different operating rules, it may be
less useful as an indicator [of flood defence]. The barrier is now closed to retain water in
the Thames River as well as to lessen the risk of flooding. (It was closed on 9 successive
tides at the start of 2003.) Thus, the number of closures has increased greatly in recent
years. This indicator would only be useful if it were possible to distinguish the number of
closures made specifically to lessen flood risk.223
Second, quite apart from any global change in sea levels, London is sinking. As the UK Environment
Agency explains:
Tide levels are steadily increasing owing to a combination of factors. These include
higher mean sea levels, greater storminess, increasing tide amplitude, the tilting of the
British Isles (with the south eastern corner tipping downwards) and the settlement of
London on its bed of clay. As a result tide levels are rising in the Thames Estuary,
relative to the land, by about 60cm per century. Surge tides are a particular threat and
occur under certain meteorological conditions.224
To put this in perspective, according to the IPCC, “the rate of average global sea level rise in the 20th
century is in the range of 1.0 to 2.0 mm/year.”225 That means 1-2 centimeters per decade or 10-20
centimeters per century. So relative to the land, the London tide is rising anywhere from three to six times
faster than global sea-level rise.
Third, risk perceptions influence barrier closure decisions. The initial stimulus to build the barrier system
was a flood in 1953 that killed 300 people. “Today,” a CBS News feature comments, “such a flood would
be far more deadly. One and a quarter-million people now live on the Thames river flood plain. Thanks to
a booming economy, more are moving in each month.”226 The more people and property at risk, the more
risk-averse decision makers are likely to be.
Given the confounding variables—barrier closings for purposes other than flood control, the sinking of
London, the post-glacial tilt of the British Isles, the high priority UK authorities place on avoiding the
next killer flood, to say nothing of the natural variability of North-Sea weather—it is impossible to
discern a global climate signal in the number of annual Thames barrier closings.
Although the Thames barriers were completed in 1982 and were first used in 1983, Gore’s graph of
annual barrier closings (AIT, p.189) goes back to 1930. Perhaps the graph’s pre-1980s portion illustrates
the operation of earlier flood control devices—in which case, it is comparing apples to oranges. By so
doing, the graph gives the impression that storm surges on the Thames became a serious threat only
recently, in the era of greenhouse warming. Not so. Consider this snippet from the UK Government’s
Environment Agency:
“There was last night the greatest tide that was ever remembered in England to
have been in this River all Whitehall having been drowned.” Thus wrote Samuel
Pepys in his diary on 7th December 1663. Even in Pepys’ day the menace of flooding on
90

  

the Thames had a long established history. In 1236 the river was reported as overflowing
“and in the great Palace of Westminster men did row with wherries in the midst of the
hall.” (John Stow, The Chronicles of England) The last time that central London flooded
was in 1928 when 14 people drowned. In 1953 there was disastrous flooding on the East
Coast and the Thames Estuary with a toll of over 300 lives. If this flood had reached
central London's highly populated low lying areas the result could have been horrifying
beyond measure.227

AIT: “Further sea level rise could be many times larger and more rapid depending on
what happens in Antarctica and Greenland—and on choices we make or do not make—
now concerning global warming.” (AIT, p. 189)
Comment: Almost anything is possible, but how much sea level rise may we reasonably infer from 20th
century data? A recent study by Church and White (2006), using TOPEX-Poseidon and Jason-1 satellite
altimeters as well as tide gauge data, found a global mean sea level rise of 195 mm (~7.6 inch) from
January 1870 to December 2004, a 20th century sea-level rise rate of 1.7 ± 0.3 mm/year, and “a significant
acceleration of sea-level rise [during the 135-year period] of 0.013 ± 0.006 mm/year.”228 The researchers
estimate that if this acceleration persists through the 21st century, “sea level in 2100 would be 310 ± 30
mm higher than in 1990”—about 12 inches higher. A foot of sea-level rise is not trivial, but neither is it
alarming. The U.S. East Coast experienced some of the world’s most rapid sea level rise during the last
half of the 20th century.229 Yet development and property values exploded.
Gore’s remark that sea level rise could be “many times larger and more rapid depending…on the choices
we make or do not make—now concerning global warming,” is just plain wrong. The most aggressive
choice America could make “now” would be to join the European Union in implementing the Kyoto
Protocol. But according to Tom Wigley of the National Center for Atmospheric Research, Kyoto would
avert only 1 cm of sea-level rise by 2050 and 2.5 cm by 2100. That’s because Kyoto would avert only
0.07°C of warming by 2050 and 0.15°C by 2100.230 The energy policy choices we make or do not make
“now” cannot materially affect the rate of sea-level rise in the 21st century.

AIT: “The East Antarctic ice shelf is the largest ice mass on the planet and had been
thought to be still increasing in size. However, two new studies in 2006 showed overall
volumes of ice in Antarctica appear to be declining, and that 85 percent of the glaciers
there appear to be accelerating their flow toward the sea.” (AIT, p. 190)
Comment: Of the two studies to which Gore alludes, I can identify only one.
Isabella Velicogna and John Wahr of the University of Colorado used satellite measurements of gravity
fluctuations to infer ice-mass changes in Antarctica.231 Gore gives the impression that all of Antarctica,
including the East Antarctic Ice Sheet (EAIS), is losing ice mass. In fact, almost all the ice loss observed
by Velicogna and Wahr comes from the smaller West Antarctic ice sheet (WAIS).232

  

91

The ice mass variations over the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (red) and the East Antarctic Ice Sheet (green).
Source: Velicogna and Wahr (2006).

A few months earlier, Science published a study by Davis et al. (2005), who examined Antarctic ice mass
balance changes over a somewhat longer period, from May 1992 to May 2003.233 The Davis team also
found that the WAIS was losing mass. However, the larger EAIS was gaining mass (from snow
accumulation) at a faster rate, yielding a net increase in Antarctic ice. The overall effect was to reduce
sea-level rise by 0.09 mm/year.
As Patrick Michaels points out, Velicogna and Wahr begin their analysis at the peak of ice mass
accumulation in Davis et al.’s longer record. See the Figure below.

The ice mass changes (in terms of elevations change) observed over the
East Antarctic Ice Sheet from May 1992-May 2003.
Source: Davis et al. (2005).

92

  

“Notice,” says Michaels, “that in mid-2002 (the start of the Velicogna and Wahr analysis) ice mass was at
the highest level in the record. This means that the apparent decline in the record of Velicogna and Wahr
may simply be the short-term correction to an anomalously high mass gain during a period of long-term
mass growth.” He then adds: “But who is to know for sure? It is impossible to tell anything about a trend
in a system as vast as Antarctica with less than three years worth of data.”
Two other recent studies also indicate a positive mass balance in Antarctica. Chen et al. (2006) found that,
during April 2002 to November 2005, ice mass gains in the EAIS exceeded ice mass losses in the WAIS,
creating a small positive net gain.234 Similarly, Wingham et al. (2006) found that, during 1992-2003, mass
gains from accumulating snow on the Antarctic Peninsula and within East Antarctica exceeded ice mass
loss in West Antarctica.235
A study by Van den Broeke et al. (2006) of Antarctica’s ablation zones (areas where ice mass losses in
the summer exceed winter snow accumulations) indicates that, so far, global warming has had no impact
on overall Antarctic ice mass balance. The researchers found no net change in the size of the ablation
zones, and none in the rate of mass loss, during the 25-year period from 1980 to 2004.236

AIT: “Second, air temperatures higher above the ice warmed more rapidly than air
temperatures anywhere else on earth. This finding was actually a surprise, and scientists
have not yet been able to explain why it is occurring.” (AIT, p. 190)
Gore refers to a study by John Turner and colleagues of the British Antarctic Survey. The Turner team
analyzed weather balloon data over the past 30 years and found a 0.5°C to 0.7°C per decade wintertime
warming trend in the mid-troposphere above Antarctica. That is a warming rate about three times faster
than the global average.
Lest anyone start to panic, several points should be kept in mind. First, NASA satellites that also measure
troposphere temperatures show a 0.12°C per decade Antarctic cooling trend since November 1978.237
Second, as Gore indicates, the Turner group could not reproduce the observed warming pattern using
climate models, leading the researchers to state that they “are unable to attribute these changes to
increasing greenhouse gas levels at this time.” Third, the 0.5-0.7°C per decade warming observed by
Turner et al. is occurring in the middle atmosphere (at 600 hPa), not at the surface, where the ice is. The
Turner team reports an Antarctic surface-warming trend of 0.15°C per decade from 1971 to 2003—
roughly the global average. Fourth, some records indicate that large areas of the Antarctic surface actually
cooled in recent decades.238

AIT: “East Antarctica is still considered far more stable over long periods of time than
the West Antarctic ice shelf, which is propped up against the tops of islands. This
peculiar geology is important for two reasons: first, its weight is resting on land and
therefore its mass has not displaced seawater as floating ice would. So if it melted or
slipped off its moorings into the sea, it would raise sea levels worldwide by 20 feet.
Second, the ocean flows underneath large sections of this ice shelf, and as the ocean has
warmed, scientists have documented significant and alarming structural changes on the
underside of the ice shelf.” (AIT, p. 190)

  

93

Comment: Gore provides no information allowing the reader to assess whether the “structural changes on
the underside of the ice sheet” are “significant” or “alarming.” He probably refers to research by NASA’s
Robert Bindschadler showing that water from the intermediate depths—the warmest water in polar
oceans—is melting the submarine base of the glaciers, accelerating their flow towards the sea.239
Bindschadler is careful to point out “the absence of any indication of increasing sea surface temperature”
in the polar oceans, and he notes that “warmth in the ocean arriving from lower latitudes would raise the
temperature of this [comparatively warm] intermediate water a fraction of a degree, hardly enough to
initiate a sudden glacier acceleration.” So why are glaciers accelerating?
According to Bindschadler, once the intermediate layer penetrates the moraine, or sill (the barrier-like
accumulation of boulders, gravel, and other debris deposited by the glacier as it retreats from its
maximum extent), the water reaches the “grounding line,” the boundary of the ice sheet’s base on the sea
floor. See the Figure below.

Source: Bindschadler (2006)

“Increased pressure at these greater depths lowers the melting point of this ice, increasing the melting
efficiency of the warmer water. Rapid melting results.” This explanation suggests a process that would
occur with or without global warming. It also suggests a process that cannot be stopped. And that is what
Bindschadler concludes:
Retreating glaciers lengthen the distance warmer water must travel from any sill to the
grounding line, and eventually tidewater glaciers retreat to beds above sea level. This
might limit the retreat in Greenland but will save neither West Antarctica, nor the equally
large subglacial basin in East Antarctica where submarine beds extend to the center of the
ice sheet.
Conway et al. (1999), in a study mapping the retreat of the Ross Ice Shelf grounding line since the last
glacial maximum (see Figure below), found that “most recession occurred in the middle to late Holocene
in the absence of substantial sea level or climate forcing.”240

94

  

Holocene grounding-line recession in the Ross Sea Embayment.
Adapted from Conway et al. (1999).

Conway et al. conclude that the current grounding line retreat is likely natural and will continue even in
the absence of greenhouse forcing:
We suggest that modern grounding-line retreat is part of ongoing recession that has been
under way since the early to mid-Holocene time. It is not a consequence of anthropogenic
warming or recent sea level rise. In other words, the future of the WAIS may have been
predetermined when grounding-line retreat was triggered in early Holocene time.
Continued recession and perhaps even complete disintegration of the WAIS within the
present interglacial period could well be inevitable.
When might the “inevitable” occur? Conway et al. state that “if the grounding line continues to pull back
at the present [i.e. 1990s] rate, complete deglaciation will take about 7,000 years.”
Of course, such estimates are uncertain, because ice sheets are dynamic systems that can change in
unpredictable ways and global warming might accelerate the ongoing recession of the WAIS.
Nonetheless, the “significant and alarming structural changes” to which Gore alludes have likely been
going on for millennia, with no help from man-made global warming. Gore cites no specific evidence to
justify fears of an impending collapse of the WAIS, or any significant portion of it.

  

95

XIV. Greenland and Sea-Level Rise

AIT: “These pools [of meltwater on the top of the Greenland glacier] have always been
known to occur, but the difference now is that there are many more of them covering a
far larger area of the ice…they are exactly the same kind of meltwater pools
that…scientists observed on top of the Larsen-B ice shelf in the period before its sudden
and shocking disappearance…this meltwater is now believed to keep sinking all the way
down to the bottom, cutting deep crevasses and vertical tunnels that scientists call
‘moulins.’ When the water reaches the bottom of the ice, it lubricates the surface of the
bedrock and destabilizes the ice mass, raising fears that the ice mass will slide more
quickly toward the ocean. (AIT, p. 192)
Comment: To illustrate these points, Gore presents a photograph and a diagram from a study of
“moulins” by Zwally et al. (2002), published in the journal Science.241 See the images below.

Photograph and diagram of a “moulin”
Source: Zwally et al. (2002)

The study found that moulins accelerate glacial movement in Greenland in the summertime, but only by a
few percent. For example, glacial flow in 1998 increased from 31.3 cm/day in winter to 40.1cm/day in
July, falling back to 29.8 cm/day in August, increasing annual glacial movement by 4.7 meters. Were it
not for satellite sensing systems, nobody would even notice!
Moulins in numbers equal to or surpassing those observed today probably occurred during the first half of
the 20th century, with no major loss of grounded ice. Chylek et al. (2006) examined temperature data from
the only two weather stations in Greenland with a century-long measurement record that also covered the
decade from 1995 to 2005, Godthab Nuuk on the west and Mamassalik on the east coast of southern
Greenland.242 See the Figure below.

  

97

Greenland summers were warmer in the 1920s-1940s; moulins were probably more abundant.
Source: Chylek et al. (2006)

Chylek et al. found that, “Almost all decades between 1915 and 1965 were warmer or at least as warm as
the 1995 to 2005 decade…suggesting the current warm Greenland climate is not unprecedented and that
similar temperatures were a norm in the first half the 20th century.” The researchers also found “no
statistically significant difference between the average temperature from the 1905 to the 1955 period and
1955 to 2005 period,” the only difference being that summertime (JJA) average temperatures were
warmer at both stations during the 1905-1955 period. Further, although the decade 1920-1930 was as
warm as the decade 1995-2005, the rate of warming was “50% higher” during the earlier decade.
Chylek et al. conclude that recent glacier acceleration in Greenland, as observed by Rignot and
Kanagaratnam (2006),243 “has probably occurred previously. There should have been the same or more
extensive acceleration during the 1920-1930 warming as well as during the Medieval Warm period in
Greenland … when Greenland temperatures were generally higher than today.”

AIT: “If Greenland melted or broke up and slipped into the sea—or if half of Greenland
and half of Antarctica melted or broke up and slipped into the sea, sea levels worldwide
would increase by between 18 and 20 feet. Tony Blair’s advisor, David King is among
the scientists who have been warning about the potential consequences of large changes
in these ice shelves. At a 2004 conference in Berlin, he said: ‘The maps of the world will
have to be redrawn.’” Gore then presents 10 pages of before-and-after ‘photographs’
showing what 20 feet of sea level rise would do to the world’s major coastal
communities. (AIT, p. 196)
Comment: “The Greenland ice sheet cannot slip into the sea,” as one reviewer explains, “since it is
resting in a bowl-shaped depression produced by its own weight, surrounded by mountains which permit
only limited glacier outflow to the sea.”244 Also, as noted above, there is no evidence that “moulins” are
destabilizing the ice sheet.
How long would it take to melt half of Greenland? A modeling study reviewed by the IPCC found that a
sustained 5.5°C warming of Greenland would melt about half the glacier and increase sea level by 3
meters “over a thousand years.”245
NASA’s Gavin Schmidt, a co-founder of RealClimate.Org, was hard pressed to defend Gore’s
apocalyptic scenario when asked about it by Salon magazine.246 According to Salon, Schmidt believes a
98

  

20-foot rise in sea level is plausible “in the long run—the very long run.” How long, Salon asked?
“Maybe 1,000 years,” said Schmidt. “There’s some uncertainty about how quickly that could happen,” he
continued, “but Gore was very careful not to say this is something that is going to happen tomorrow.”
Nice try. Gore failed to say that a 20-foot sea-level rise would not happen the Day After Tomorrow.247
Worse, Gore implied that a collapse of the ice sheets could happen in our lifetime when he counted up all
the millions of people living in Beijing, Shanghai, Calcutta, and Bangladesh who would be “displaced,
“forced to move,” or “have to be evacuated” (AIT, pp. 204-206).
Nobody knows how warm Greenland is going to be over the next thousand years. We do have data on the
net rate of ice mass loss in Antarctica and Greenland. Greenland’s glaciers are thinning at the edges and
thickening in the interior. If the gains are subtracted from the losses, the net volume of ice lost during
2003 to 2005 was ~101 gigatons a year.248 At that rate, Greenland is contributing 0.28 mm of sea-level
rise per year—about one inch per century.
Zwally et al. (2005) used satellite altimetry to examine ice mass changes in Greenland, East Antarctica,
and West Antarctica during 1992-2002.249 They found a combined sea-level-rise-ice-loss-equivalent rate
of 0.05 mm per year. At that rate, comments the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global
Change, “it would take a full millennium to raise global sea level by just 5 cm, and take fully 20,000
years to raise it a single meter.”250

  

99

XV. Humanity and Nature

AIT: “We are witnessing an unprecedented and massive collision between our
civilization and the Earth.” (AIT, p. 214)
Comment: Gore illustrates this statement with a two-page photograph of a garbage-strewn refuse dump
in Mexico City. He implies that mankind is trashing the planet, literally and figuratively. But is a refuse
heap representative of Mexico City, and is Mexico City representative of “our civilization”? There is a
touch of misanthropy in Gore’s presentation, as if blight and swill were the hallmarks of industrial
civilization.

AIT: “The first [factor transforming mankind’s relationship with the Earth] is the population
explosion, which in many ways is a success story in that death rates and birth rates are going
down everywhere in the world, and families on average are getting smaller. But even though
these hoped-for developments have been taking place more rapidly than anyone would have
anticipated a few decades ago, the momentum in world population has built up so powerfully that
the ‘explosion’ is still taking place and continues to transform our relationship to the planet.”
(AIT, p. 216)
Comment: Gore sees “success” in the reduction of birth and death rates and average family size, not in
the fossil-energy-based civilization that has enabled mankind to increase its numbers from roughly 1
billion people at the dawn of the industrial revolution to 6.5 billion people today. Environmental
journalist Gregg Easterbrook noticed the negative tone of Gore’s discussion of population growth in the
film version of AIT:
The former vice president clicks up a viewgraph showing the human population has
grown more during his lifetime than in all previous history combined. He looks at the
viewgraph with aversion, as if embarrassed by humanity’s proliferation. Population
growth is a fantastic achievement—though one that engenders problems we must fix,
including inequality and greenhouse gases.251
Population growth is not the only “fantastic achievement” of the past two centuries that would be
unthinkable in a world without fossil fuels. Others include the alleviation of poverty and hunger, the
doubling of human life-spans, and the democratization of consumer goods, literacy, leisure, and personal
mobility. AIT depicts fossil fuels solely as sources of “global warming pollution.” It is well to remember
that, without abundant, affordable energy, the mass of mankind might still be mired in slavery and
serfdom, as Bjorn Lomborg intimates:
If we think for a moment of the energy we use in terms of “servants,” each with the same
work power as a human being, each person in Western Europe has access to 150 servants,
in the U.S. about 300, and even in India each person has 15 servants to help along. It is
indeed unpleasant to imagine what it would be like to live without these helpers.252

  

101

AIT: “The way we treat forests is a political issue. This is the border between Haiti and
the Dominican Republic. Haiti has one set of policies; the Dominican Republic another.”
The accompanying photograph shows a barren treeless landscape on the Haitian side of
the border and lush green forest cover on the Dominican side.
(AIT, pp. 222-223)
Comment: The photograph also illustrates Berkeley professor Jack Hollander’s thesis that “poverty, not
affluence, is the environment’s number one enemy.”253 The per capita income of the Dominican Republic
is more than four times that of Haiti.254 Desperately poor people live too close to the edge of subsistence
to safeguard the health and beauty of their surroundings. There is a serious risk, never acknowledged by
AIT, that environmental stewardship would decline in a world made poorer by political constraints on
energy use.

AIT: “Much of the forest destruction comes from burning. Almost 30% of the CO2
released into the atmosphere each year is a result of the burning of brushland for
subsistence agriculture and wood fires used for cooking.” (AIT, p. 227)
Comment: Increased access to fossil energy, especially grid-based electricity, would reduce developing
countries’ use of fuel wood, benefiting both people and the planet. As atmospheric scientist John Christy,
a former African missionary, explains:
I always thought that if each home could be fitted with an electric light bulb and a
microwave oven electrified by a coal-fired power plant, several good things would
happen. The women [who currently spend much of their time gathering and hauling wood
from the forests] would be freed to work on other more productive pursuits, the indoor air
quality would be much cleaner so health would be improve, food could be prepared more
safely, there would be light for reading and advancement, information through television
or radio could be received, and the forest with its beautiful ecosystem could be saved.255
The Kyoto “process” aims to suppress fossil energy use, initially in industrialized countries but eventually
in all countries. At what point in their development does Mr. Gore think it is appropriate for today’s
energy-poor countries to begin limiting their people’s access to fossil fuels?

AIT: “But we now have the power to divert giant rivers according to our design instead
of nature’s. When we divert too much water without regard to nature, rivers sometimes
no longer reach the sea. The former Soviet Union diverted water from two mighty rivers
in central Asia that fed the Aral Sea (the Amu Darya and Syr Darya)…The entire Aral
Sea is now, essentially, gone.” (AIT, pp. 240-245)

102

  

Stranded boat on the Aral Sea

Comment: These statements raise a question about how seriously Gore takes his own doomsday
scenario. Let us recapitulate Gore’s threat assessment:
•
•
•

The same type of meltwater pools that formed on top of the Larson B ice shelf prior to its collapse are
forming in increasing numbers on the top of the Greenland Ice Sheet.
The meltwater pools and streams tunnel down to the bedrock, fracturing and lubricating the ice mass.
Half or more of the ice sheet could break apart and slide into the sea, inundating low-lying States like
Florida and the world’s great coastal cities.

If Gore really believes the Greenland Ice Sheet is on the brink of collapse, why does he call for measures
that can have no discernible effect on glacial dynamics for decades to come? Remember, the Kyoto
Protocol would not actually cool the planet; it would merely slow—by an undetectably small amount—
the projected rate of warming. Over the next quarter century or longer, Gore’s “solutions”—emissions
trading, energy efficiency standards, renewable energy mandates, carpooling, eating less meat, etc.—
would not eliminate or even shrink a single meltwater pool, stream, or tunnel supposedly undermining the
glacier’s structural integrity today.
Structural problems call for engineering solutions. Mankind, as Gore points out, has the power to divert
mighty rivers and efface giant water bodies. So why doesn’t he call for feasibility studies and pilot
projects to determine whether engineers could divert some of the meltwater allegedly destabilizing the
glacier? I suspect it’s because a threat assessment dire enough to justify engineering projects to “Save the
Ice Sheet” would not survive public scrutiny.

  

103

XVI. America and Climate Change

AIT: “As shown in this graphic representation of every nation’s relative contribution to
global warming, the United States is responsible for more greenhouse gas pollution than
South America, Africa, the Middle East, Australia, Japan, and Asia—all put together.”
(AIT pp. 250-251)
Comment: No American should feel guilty about this. Carbon dioxide emissions derive from energy use,
which in turn derives from economic activity. The United States is “responsible for” more cumulative
CO2 emissions than South America, Africa, the Middle East, Australia, Japan, and Southeast Asia
combined, because the United States has been the world’s great economic engine for the past 60 years or
more. The world would be a much poorer place had the U.S. economy been built on wind turbines, solar
panels, and bio-fuels rather than on fossil energy.

AIT: “If you compare the per capita carbon emissions in China, India, Africa, Japan, the
EU, and Russia to those in the United States, it is obvious, as the chart at top right shows,
that we are way, way above everybody else.” (AIT, p. 252)
Comment: No one should feel guilty about this either. An energy-rich country like the United States
naturally has higher per capita carbon emissions than an energy-poor country like China or India. People
in those countries emit less CO2 per capita not because they are more virtuous or care more about the
planet but because they produce less.
There are also compelling economic and cultural reasons why U.S. per capita emissions are higher than
Japanese and European per capita emissions.
America is endowed with abundant fossil energy resources—coal, oil, and natural gas. Japan has virtually
no fossil energy resources. Where energy is scarcer, energy efficiency is more valuable. Heavy
investment in energy efficiency was economically efficient in Japan; it would have been wasteful in the
United States.
The United States is a continent-sized country. Japan is a tiny island nation. In the United States, the
distances from farm and factory to market are much greater, so we must use more fuel per dollar of output
to run our economy. The spaciousness of our country also fosters development patterns that would be
prohibitively costly in Japan. Real estate in Japan is very scarce, hence very expensive, so most people
live in small homes or apartments in densely packed communities. Real estate is plentiful in the United
States, so an average family can afford a larger home with more space for more energy-using appliances.
Communities are more spread out, contributing to greater automobile use, which in turn fosters lowdensity development.
Europe is as large as the United States, but Europe was slow to develop an integrated market, limiting
commercial demand for motor fuel. Also, the Old World, with its legacy of stratified social classes and
authoritarian governments, has never prized personal mobility. EU governments tax gasoline at rates that
would not only cripple commuter and commercial transport in the United States, but also fuel taxpayer
rebellions.256 European unemployment rates are higher and economic growth rates are lower than ours.
All of these dubious “advantages” contribute to Europe’s lower per capita emission levels.
  

105

A more accurate measure of environmental performance is carbon intensity—emissions per dollar of
economic output. This measure is still inappropriate if used as a moral metric, because carbon intensity
chiefly reflects geographic and historical “accidents” such as a country’s natural resource base and
industrial structure. That said, the U.S. economy is far from the world’s most carbon intensive. We are
more carbon intensive than the U.K., Germany, Japan, and Brazil, but less carbon intensive than Russia,
China, India, Saudi Arabia, Australia, South Korea, and Canada. See the Figure below.

Carbon Intensity
6
5
4
3
2
1
UK
G
er
m
an
y
S.
Ko
re
a

U.
S.
na
da
Ch
in
a
In
dia
Ru
ss
ia
Ja
pa
n
Sa
ud
i
Ca

Br
az
il
Au
st
ra
lia

0

Metric tons CO2 per $1000 GDP
Source: EIA 257

U.S. carbon intensity is declining at a rate of about 1.6% annually. Per unit of GDP, U.S. CO2 emissions
in 2005 were 23% lower than in 1990.258 See the Figures below.

U.S. Carbon Intensity Trends
Source: EIA

AIT neglects to mention the circumstances that make it reasonable rather than blameworthy for America
to be the world’s biggest CO2-emitter: the world’s largest economy, abundant fossil energy resources,
106

  

markets integrated across continental distances, highly productive workers, plentiful real estate, and the
world’s most mobile population. Theses are all positive attributes. Yet Gore manages to depict the United
States as an environmental villain.
Gore claims his message is non-partisan and non-ideological (AIT, p. 287). But he blames America-the‘fuelish’ for everything from floods, to hurricanes, to famine in Africa. In this respect, Gore is just
another partisan ideologue who “blames America first”—a practice that was habitual among left-leaning
activists and politicians long before global warming emerged as a public concern.259

  

107

XVII. Consensus, Science, and Special Interests

AIT: “A university of California at San Diego scientist, Dr. Naomi Oreskes, published in
Science magazine a massive study of every peer-reviewed science journal on global warming
from the previous 10 years. She and her team selected a large random sample of 928 articles
representing almost 10% of the total, and carefully analyzed how many of the articles agreed
or disagreed with the prevailing consensus view. About a quarter of the articles in the sample
dealt with aspects of global warming that did not involve any discussion of the central
elements of the consensus. Of the three quarters that did address these main points, the
percentage that disagreed with the consensus? Zero.” (AIT, p. 262)
Comment: This is misleading. A “central element” of the “consensus” as Gore defines it is the view that
global warming’s “consequences are so dangerous as to warrant immediate action” (AIT, p. 261). The
“consensus” Oreskes found was of a more limited character.
None of the abstracts of the papers her team examined (they read only the abstracts, not the full papers)
disputed the IPCC’s conclusion that, “Most of the observed warming over the last 50 years is likely to
have been due to the increase in greenhouse gas concentrations.”260 However, that tells us nothing about
how dangerous global warming is likely to be, or what type of policy response is appropriate.
Gore persistently confuses the fact of global warming with his alarmist interpretation of global warming.
This commentary has referenced numerous studies that indicate a significant role of natural variability in
recent climate change,261 indicate warmer-than-present conditions in earlier periods of the Holocene,262
challenge the alarmist spin on global warming impacts,263 and provide data inconsistent with alarmist
forecasts.264

AIT: “The misperception that there is serious disagreement among scientists about global
warming is actually an illusion that has been deliberately fostered by a relatively small but
extremely well-funded cadre of special interests, including Exxon Mobil and a few other oil,
coal, and utilities companies.” (AIT, p. 263)
Comment: Turnabout is fair play. The misperception that science justifies alarm and the adoption of
growth-chilling energy rationing schemes is an illusion deliberately fostered by a large cadre of wellfunded special interests. Climate alarmism is the sine qua non of billions of dollars in government awards
to researchers and universities, and millions of dollars in direct mail contributions to eco-activist groups.
Insurance companies like Swiss Re profit from spreading alarm, because people are more willing to buy
insurance and pay higher premiums when they’re scared.265 “News” magazines like Time profit from
spreading alarm, because scary stories sell copy.
Many companies view climate policy as an opportunity to rig the market. Carbon taxes or their regulatory
equivalent boost the market shares of companies that produce “alternative fuels,”266 generate electricity
from low- and non-carbon fuels,267 or manufacture high-end (ultra-energy efficient) appliances,268 wind
turbines, natural gas turbines, coal gasification technology, and nuclear reactors.269
Gore’s preferred policy, a cap-and-trade scheme, is essentially a carbon cartel.270 Such schemes set
OPEC-like production quotas—in the form of emission allowances or credits—for all fossil fuels rather
  

109

than just oil. By restricting the supply and raising the price of fossil energy, cap-and-trade creates
windfalls for the lucky holders of emission credits. That is why companies with a flair of illegal market
manipulation271—Enron,272 American Electric Power, Cinergy, Entergy,273 and Calpine—have been
among the most aggressive lobbyists for the Kyoto Protocol or kindred emission trading schemes. Among
the most influential lobbyists for Kyoto-style policy are Wall Street firms that expect to make
commissions on carbon permit purchases and sales and manage “green” investment portfolios.274
Energy-rationing profiteers also include the regulatory bureaucrats and prosecutors whose power,
budgets, and staff would grow in a carbon-constrained economy. Consider the State attorneys general
who are suing EPA to regulate CO2 under the Clean Air Act.275 Carbon dioxide is the most ubiquitous
byproduct of industrial society. In the United States, more than 10,000 firms emit at least 10,000 metric
tons of CO2 per year, more than 186,000 firms emit at least 1,000 metric tons of CO2 per year, and more
than 1,000,000 firms emit at least 100 metric tons of CO2 per year.276 States have primary responsibility to
enforce the Clean Air Act. If the AGs win and EPA classifies CO2 as a regulated pollutant, tens of
thousands of hitherto law-abiding firms would instantly become “polluters” potentially subject to civil
and criminal penalties. The scope of the AGs’ prosecutorial domain would grow by orders of magnitude.
Finally, climate alarmism helps politicians like Gore vilify their opponents as greedy shills and promote
themselves as planetary saviors. In politics, fear mongering pays, as H.L. Mencken observed long ago:
“The whole aim of practical politics is to keep the populace alarmed, and hence clamorous to be led to
safety, by menacing it with an endless series of hobgoblins, all of them imaginary.”

AIT: Gore accuses Exxon Mobil and a “few other oil, coal, and utility companies” of
running a “disinformation campaign” designed to “reposition global warming as theory,
rather than fact.” He compares this “technique” to the tobacco lobby’s attempt to foster
public “doubt” about the link between smoking and lung cancer. (AIT, p. 263)
Comment: Two clicks of the mouse reveals that Exxon Mobil acknowledges global warming as a fact,
takes the potential risks of climate change seriously, and invests considerable sums to improve its energy
efficiency and develop low- and non-emitting energy technologies.277 By comparing non-alarmists to
‘tobacco scientists,’ Gore in effect says that anyone who disagrees with him is a corporate shill whose
views and motives do not deserve respect. If the media were to adopt this attitude, then Gore and his allies
would monopolize the public conversation on global warming. A more self-serving line of argument is
hard to imagine.

110

  

XVIII. Bush and Global Warming

AIT: “One prominent source of disinformation on global warming has been the BushCheney White House…At the beginning of 2001, President Bush hired a lawyer/lobbyist
named Phillip Cooney to be in charge of environmental policy in the White House.”
(AIT, p. 264)
Comment: Bush “hired” Cooney to be “in charge?” That should come as a surprise to Jim Connaughton,
Chairman of the White House Council on Environmental Quality, who hired Cooney and was his boss at
the CEQ.

AIT: “Even though Cooney has no scientific training whatsoever, he was empowered by
the president to edit and censor the official assessments of global warming from the EPA
and other parts of the federal government.” (AIT, p. 264)
Comment: The “assessments” to which Cooney made editorial contributions (he was not the sole or final
editor)—Our Changing Planet, the Climate Change Science Program’s Strategic Plan, and Climate
Action Report 2002—were not, strictly speaking, science reports but policy documents. Our Changing
Planet says as part of its subtitle, “A Supplement to the President’s Fiscal Year 2004 and 2005
Budgets.”278 Climate Action Report 2002 (CAR) was a report submitted to fulfill U.S. treaty obligations
under Articles IV and XII of the Framework Convention on Climate Change, which require periodic
reporting of information about greenhouse gas inventories and policies.279 It is a White House counsel’s
job to vet such reports before they are published and become the official position or policy of the U.S.
Government.

AIT: “In 2005, a White House memo authorized by Cooney (a portion of which appears
below) was leaked to the New York Times by a hidden whistleblower inside the
administration. Cooney had diligently edited out any mention of the dangers global
warming poses to the American people.” (AIT, p. 264)

Phil Cooney’s edits
Source: New York Times
  

111

Comment: Gore conveniently neglects to mention that the whistleblower, Rick Piltz, was also a nonscientist whose job was to produce those reports by editing drafts from agency scientists. Piltz did not like
Cooney’s edits, but then few editors like being edited. More importantly, Gore never evaluates Cooney’s
editing on the merits. The mere fact that Cooney deleted a portion of the text is sufficient, in Gore’s view,
to convict him of distorting science. Here is the portion Cooney deleted:
Warming will also cause reductions in mountain glaciers and advance the timing of the
melt of mountain snow peaks in polar regions. In turn, runoff rates will change and flood
potential will be altered in ways that are currently not well understood. There will be
significant shifts in the seasonality of runoff that will have serious impacts on native
populations that rely on fishing and hunting for their livelihood. These changes will be
further complicated by shifts in precipitation regimes and a possible intensification and
increased frequency of hydrologic events.
In the margins, Cooney explained his reason for deleting the material: “Straying from research strategy
into speculative findings from here.” Cooney deleted as “speculative” the claim that warming will reduce
mountain snow peaks in polar regions. That editorial decision is justified because there is evidence that
warming-induced snowfall is thickening the snow pack on East Antarctica and Greenland.280 Cooney
deleted as “speculative” the claim that global warming will adversely affect native populations in Alaska.
That editorial decision is also justified, because Inuit culture flourished during the Medieval Warm
period, when Alaska was as warm as or warmer than it is today.281

AIT: Gore blows up across two pages the following aphorism by Upton Sinclair: “It is
difficult to get a man to understand something when his salary depends on his not
understanding it. Upton Sinclair.” (AIT, pp. 266-67)
Comment: Those who live in glass houses should not throw stones. The greenhouse gravy train feeds
many scientists, advocacy groups, energy-rationing profiteers, bureaucrats, and politicians. It is difficult
to get a man to question global warming alarmism when his government grant, direct mail income,
industrial policy privilege, carbon trading commission, regulatory power, prosecutorial pillage, or
political career depends on his not questioning it.

AIT: “On June 21, 2004, 48 Nobel Prize-winning scientists accused President Bush and
his administration of distorting science.” Gore quotes them as criticizing Bush for
“ignoring the scientific consensus on critical issues such as global climate change.”
(AIT, pp. 269-270)
Comment: Gore neglects to mention that the scientists in question are members of “Scientists and
Engineers for Change,” a 527 political group set up to promote the Kerry for President Campaign. Indeed,
the June 21, 2004 letter to which Gore refers and from which he quotes is first and foremost an
endorsement of John Kerry for President.282
The group’s leading complaint is that Bush is “reducing funding for scientific research.” Their own fact
sheet qualifies this allegation to the point of falsifying it.283 According to the fact sheet, under Bush’s FY
2005 budget, “government-wide funding for basic research would grow by only 0.6% and funding for

112

  

applied research would grow by only 0.5%—below the rate of inflation.” So Bush’s FY 2005 budget does
not reduce science funding, it slows the rate of increase.284
But why single out the FY 2005 budget? No trend can be inferred from one budget year. In President
Clinton’s last fiscal year (FY 2001), the federal government spent $6.548 billion on general science and
basic research. Under Bush, spending in this category (budget function 251) grew from $7.294 billion in
FY 2002, to $7.993 billion in FY 2003, to $8.416 billion in FY 2004, to $8.896 billion in FY 2005, to an
estimated $9.254 billion in FY 2006.285 So, in the last year of Bush’s first term, federal funding for
general science and basic research was $2.348 billion higher than in the last year of Clinton’s second
term—an increase of 35%. Scientists and Engineers for Change accuse Bush of undermining science
because they want MORE. That these partisan whiners are also Nobel laureates shows how politicized
science has become.

AIT: “The image [contained in a pamphlet on “Global Stewardship,” published by the
first Bush administration in 1991] features an old-fashioned set of scales. On one side are
gold bars, representing wealth and economic success. On the other side is…the entire
planet! The implication is that this is not only a choice we have to make, but a difficult
one. But, in fact, it’s a false choice for two reasons. First, without a planet, we won’t fully
enjoy those gold bars. And second, if we do the right thing, then we’re going to create a
lot of wealth, jobs, and opportunity.” (AIT, pp. 270-271)
Comment: In a famous Jack Benny comedy routine, as retold in Wikipedia, an armed robber accosts
Benny and demands, “Your money or your life!”
Benny paused, and the studio audience — knowing his skinflint character — laughed
loud and long. The robber then repeated his demand: “Look, pal! I said your money or
your life!” And that’s when Benny snapped back without a break, “I’m thinking it over!”
This time, the audience laughed louder and longer than they had during the pause.286
Gore would have us believe that what Jack Benny said in jest, the first Bush administration meant in
earnest. But the joke is on Gore. He sees no reason to balance environmental concerns against other
priorities, all of which compete for finite resources. Gore might as well say that because we cannot fully
enjoy gold if we are ill, no amount of health care spending can ever be too much. Come to think of it, that
was pretty much the line the Clinton administration took when promoting Hillary Clinton’s health care
“reform” package. Clinton officials claimed that a host of new health care spending mandates and
regulations would strengthen the economy. The public did not buy it. The claim that Kyoto will make us
richer is equally silly.

  

113

XIX. Climate Policy

AIT: “The European Union has adopted this U.S. innovation [emissions trading] and is
making it work effectively there.” (AIT, p. 252)
Comment: What does “effectively” mean in this context? Gore doesn’t say. If “effectively” means
effective in reducing CO2 emissions, then the statement is incorrect. Since 1997, the year the Kyoto
Protocol was negotiated, EU emissions have increased. What is more, EU emissions are increasing faster
than U.S. emissions.

U.S. and EU emissions growth since Kyoto
Source: EIA data287

EU emissions are rising so rapidly that most EU countries are not on track to meet their Kyoto targets.288
See the Figure below.

Source: Institute for Public Policy Research, Traffic Lights Report (Dec. 27, 2005)
  

115

Open Europe, a British think tank, notes several “serious problems” with the EU Emission Trading
Scheme (ETS):289
•

•

•

•

•

Most countries game the system for competitive advantage. The UK chose tough targets based on
past emissions as a baseline while other members gave their firms generous allowances based on
projected future emissions. During 2005-2007, the system will transfer nearly £1.5 billion from UK
firms to competitors in countries with weaker controls.
The ETS is not reducing emissions. “According to figures released in June 2006, member states
handed out permits for 1,829 million tons of CO2 in 2005, while emissions were only 1,785 million
tons…In other words, at present the system is simply not limiting emissions. Only four out of the 25
member states had targets which were lower than their actual emissions.”
The ETS enables Big Oil to profit at the expense of hospitals and schools. Instead of auctioning
permits, member states handed out permits “free to individual firms based on a variety of rather
sketchy criteria. This attempt at central planning has had all kinds of perverse results. For example
NHS hospitals have been forced to spend a total of £1,300,000 buying up permits, and 18 UK
universities are also net contributors. Ironically, large oil companies [e.g., British Petroleum] have
made substantial profits under the scheme.”
Loose targets create an unstable market that discourages technological innovation. When firms
realized in April 2006 that member states had set lax targets, permit prices fell from 30.50 per ton to
just 9.25 per ton in one week. This kind of instability undermines firms’ incentive to invest in
carbon-reducing technologies.
The system is a red tape nightmare for small entities. “Many small plants—for example the main
boiler in a hospital—are covered by the scheme, and have to employ staff to conduct monitoring,
compliance activities, and pay for official verification…such plants contribute little to total
emissions.” Public and private organizations in the UK pay an estimated £62 million per year in
administrative expenses.

AIT: Gore reports that a Canadian company has “figured out how to make a new kind of
ethanol from plant fiber—meaning that it’s cheaper and cleaner than regular ethanol.” He
also reports that, “By one estimate, this new technology means that crop waste could create
25% of the energy needed for transportation. While ethanol from corn creates 29% less
greenhouse gas than gasoline, ethanol from cellulose could cut gases by 85%.”
(AIT, p. 137)
Comment: Ethanol as a motor fuel has been around for a long time. Henry Ford built his first car, the
quadricycle, to run on pure ethanol. The federal government first began funding research on ethanol made
from cellulose more than 30 years ago. However, reports the U.S. Energy Information Administration,
“To this day, there is still not a commercial plant using cellulose as the feedstock.”290 The key question
for consumers is whether the Canadian company can make cellulosic ethanol that is more affordable than
regular gasoline. AIT sheds no light on this matter.
What we do know is that corn-based ethanol—which has been available as motor fuel for decades—is
more expensive than regular unleaded gasoline. For example, in June 2006, the per-gallon “rack”
(wholesale) price of ethanol in corn-rich Nebraska was $3.58 versus $2.22 for unleaded gasoline—a
difference of $1.36 per gallon.291
Were it not for a 51-cent-per-gallon exemption from the federal motor fuels tax and other policy
privileges, a national market for ethanol would not even exist.
116

  

AIT: “Unfortunately, the false choice posed between our economy and the environment
affects our policies in harmful ways. One example is auto mileage standards. Japan has
cars that are required by law to get more than 45 miles per gallon. Europe is not far
behind, and has passed new laws designed to surpass Japanese standards…Yet the United
States is dead last.” (AIT, p. 272)
Comment: Fuel economy standards restrict, not expand, the numbers and types of cars auto companies
may legally produce and sell. A low fuel economy standard does not restrict production of high miles-pergallon (mpg) vehicles. However, a high fuel economy standard does restrict production of low mpg
vehicles. Therefore, to say that the United States is “dead last” in fuel economy regulation is to say that
America is first in consumer choice.

AIT: “We’re told that we have to protect our automobile companies from competition in
places like China where, it is said, their leaders don’t care about the environment. In fact,
Chinese emissions standards have been raised and already far exceed our own. Ironically,
we cannot sell cars made in America to China because we don’t meet their environmental
standards.” (AIT, p. 272)
Comment: This is incorrect. U.S. fuel economy standards specify a fleet average mpg. Many U.S. cars
exceed the average, and many meet China’s new standards. According to World Resources Institute,
100% of Ford’s 2003 sales already meet China’s Phase I (2005/2006) standards, and 72% of its 2003
sales meet the Phase II (2008) standards. Similarly, 42% of GM’s 2003 sales meet Phase I standards, and
32% meet the Phase II standards.292
Gore argues as if U.S. companies cannot sell a single car in China unless all U.S.-made cars comply with
Beijing’s fuel economy standards—the equivalent of saying U.S. firms won’t be able to sell cars in
India’s market until all U.S.-made cars are built to drive on the left side of the road.

AIT: “But the auto companies are suing California to prevent this state law from going
into effect—because it would mean that, 10 years from now, they would have to
manufacture cars for California that are almost as efficient as China is making today.”
(AIT, p. 273)
Comment: Gore misrepresents the auto companies’ position. They are suing because the California law,
which sets CO2 emission standards for new cars and trucks, would establish de facto fuel economy
standards for new vehicles sold in California,293 and the Energy Policy and Conservation Act prohibits
states from adopting laws or regulations “related to” fuel economy.294 Congress enacted the prohibition to
prevent states from fragmenting the U.S. auto market.

AIT: “Our outdated environmental standards are based on faulty thinking about the
relationship between the economy and the environment…as the chart makes clear, it’s the
companies building more efficient cars that are doing well. The U.S. companies are in
deep trouble.” (AIT, p. 273)

  

117

Comment: Gore confuses fuel economy (the number of miles per gallon) with fuel efficiency (the
amount of work per unit of fuel). Today’s cars and light trucks are much more efficient than their
counterparts of 30 years ago. However, consistent with consumer preferences, most of the efficiency
gains of the past 20 years have been used to increase vehicle acceleration, towing capacity, size, and
weight rather than fuel economy.295 See the Figures below.

Trends in fuel efficiency and fuel economy for passenger cars (a) and light duty trucks (b)
Source: Lutsey and Sperling (2005)

Japanese and European car makers have higher corporate average fuel economy (CAFE) ratings not
because their cars are more efficient but because they make a larger proportion of small vehicles.

AIT: “And they’re [the Big Three] still redoubling their efforts to sell large, inefficient
gas-guzzlers even though the marketplace is sending them the same message that the
environment is sending them.” (AIT p. 273)
Comment: Much of their recent advertising push is for SUV “crossovers,” which are smaller than
conventional SUVs and get better gas mileage.

AIT: Gore’s chart on page 273 shows that, during Feb.-Nov. 2005, market capitalization
increased at Toyota (+11.86%) and Honda (+3.28%) and fell dramatically at Ford (33.20%) and GM (-35.84%).
Comment: Hindsight, as the saying goes, is always 20/20. Anticipating major shifts in consumer
preferences is seldom easy. For example, who in the year 2000 anticipated oil prices rising to $70 a
barrel? Gore overlooks two big points. First, U.S. automakers would probably not even exist today had
118

  

they been “ahead of their time” and emphasized “climate-friendly” vehicles in the 1990s. Consider this
excerpt from the April 2001 edition of Harper’s Magazine:
By the mid-1990s, the SUV had become among the most lucrative automotive categories
in history. The profit margin on each vehicle ranged from $6,500 for a compact model
like Toyota's RAV4 to $17,000 for a luxury model like the Lincoln Navigator. On
average, automakers made $10,000 for each SUV sold, ten times the margin on a sedan
or minivan, which, last year, generated a stunning $18 billion in profits for the industry.
For the first time in decades, the auto industry had a genuine cash cow, and they used it to
fund a huge expansion campaign. In 1999, for example, with the profits from a single
year’s production of Expeditions and Navigators, Ford was able to buy the Swedish
company Volvo outright.296
Second, a big part of Detroit’s troubles comes from contracts the Big Three negotiated during the 1950s,
1960s, and 1970s with the United Auto Workers. Because of those agreements, GM, Ford, and Chrysler
have been providing health care, pension, and “other post-employment benefits” (OPEB) far more
generous than those offered by Japanese and European auto makers.297

AIT: To debunk the notion that “we’re helpless to do anything” about global warming,
Gore provides a chart forecasting increases in U.S. energy production from renewable
sources (biomass, wind, solar, geothermal, and hydro). The chart shows U.S. renewable
energy production increasing from about 7 quadrillion British thermal units (quads) in
1990 to 10 quads in 2005 to 22 quads in 2030. (AIT, p. 276)
Comment: Gore’s forecast is very bullish, and he cites no source for it. The U.S. Energy Information
Administration (EIA) projects an increase in U.S. renewable energy production from 5.88 quads in 2005
to 9.02 quads in 2030—less than half the increase forecast by Gore. Moreover, in EIA’s analysis,
renewable energy production as a share of total consumption remains flat over the forecast period.
Renewable energy contributes about 6% of total U.S. energy consumption in both 2005 (5.88 quads out of
101.27 quads) and 2030 (9.02 quads out of 133.88 quads).298

AIT: Continuing his pep talk about steps “we” can take now to mitigate global warming,
Gore lauds Denmark’s wind farms, and provides a two-page photograph of an offshore
wind farm at Copenhagen. (AIT, pp. 378-379)
Comment: Gore does not address any of the well-known drawbacks of wind power. These include cost
(if wind electricity were competitive, governments would not need to subsidize and mandate it),299
intermittency (the turbines spin and generate power only when the wind blows), avian mortality,300 site
depletion (places with suitable wind conditions are a finite resource), and scenic degradation (per kWh of
electricity, wind farms consume far more land area than either fossil fuel or nuclear power plants). Gore
concedes that 300-foot-tall wind towers “alter our skylines, but many find watching their spinning blades
peaceful to look at” (p. 279). He should try telling that to Senator Ted Kennedy, who fought to block
construction of a wind farm in Nantucket Sound about eight miles from his home in Hyannis Port.301

  

119

Remains of a Condor at Altamont Wind Farm

AIT: Gore quotes from a study by Princeton economists Robert Socolow and Stephen
Pacala that, “Humanity already possesses the fundamental scientific, technical, and
industrial know how to solve the carbon and climate problems for the next half century.”
He claims that the policies Socolow and Pacala recommend, “all of which are based on
already-existing, affordable technologies, can bring emissions down to a point below
1970s levels.” (AIT, pp. 280-281)
Comment: Gore cannot know the solutions are “affordable,” because the authors specifically say they are
not going to estimate costs. The study basically shows that if political leaders can somehow coerce
everybody to use less energy, and don’t care what it costs, they can significantly reduce emissions by
2054. We needed Princeton professors to tell us that? Let’s look at some of the strategies Socolow and
Pacala (S&P) recommend.
S&P’s Strategy No. 1 is to double the fuel efficiency of 2 billion cars from 30 to 60 mpg. However, the
current fuel economy standard is 27.5 mpg for passenger cars and 21.6 mpg for light trucks.302 So S&P
are really proposing an almost threefold increase in fuel economy for a large portion of the U.S. fleet. It is
politically difficult to mandate even small fuel economy increases. Their proposal would drastically
curtail production of large SUVs, pickups, and sedans—a declining but still significant portion of the U.S.
auto market.
S&P’s Strategy No. 2 is to decrease the number of car miles traveled by half. But the U.S. population
could easily increase 50% or more by 2054.303 This strategy is tantamount to rationing cars—commuters
and soccer moms should just love it.
S&P’s Strategy No. 5 is to replace 1,400 coal electric plants with natural gas-powered facilities. But the
USA already faces a natural gas supply crunch. This strategy would play havoc with consumer electricity
bills and destroy tens of thousands more high-tech jobs in the chemical industry, which uses natural gas
as a feedstock.
120

  

S&P’s Strategy No. 9 is to add double the current global nuclear capacity to replace coal-based
electricity. This proposal should go over big with the no-nukes environmental establishment. Note that
Gore never mentions it in his summary of S&P’s recommendations on page 281.
S&P’s Strategy No. 10 is to increase wind capacity by 50 times relative to today, for a total of 2 million
large windmills. The word boondoggle comes to mind, and in case S&P has not heard, there’s a growing
grassroots backlash against wind farms. Again, check with Sen. Kennedy on this.
S&P’s Strategy No. 13 is to increase ethanol production 50 times by creating biomass plantations with an
area equal to 1/6th of world cropland. This strategy is a prescription for decimating millions of acres of
forest and other wildlife habitat.304
If AIT were a balanced presentation of issues, instead of a lawyer’s brief for energy rationing, Gore would
at least have mentioned Hoffert et al. (2002), the study to which S&P’s study was a response.305
Martin Hoffert and his colleagues, a team of 18 energy experts, examined possible technology options
that might be used in coming decades to stabilize atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Such options include
wind and solar energy, nuclear fission and fusion, biomass fuels, efficiency improvements, carbon
sequestration, and hydrogen fuel cells. Hoffert et al. found that, “All these approaches currently have
severe deficiencies that limit their ability to stabilize global climate.” They specifically took issue with the
U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s claim that, “known technological options could
achieve a broad range of atmospheric CO2 stabilization levels, such as 550 ppm, 450 ppm or below over
the next 100 years.” World energy demand could easily triple by 2050. Yet, Hoffert et al. point out,
“Energy sources that can produce 100 to 300% of present world power consumption without greenhouse
emissions do not exist operationally or as pilot plants.”
The bottom line: “CO2 is a combustion product vital to how civilization is powered; it cannot be regulated
away.” Without “drastic technological breakthroughs,” it is not possible to stabilize atmospheric CO2
concentrations and meet current and projected global energy needs.
A report by the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, U.S. Energy Scenarios for the 21st Century,
implicitly comes to the same conclusion.306 The Pew report sketches out three scenarios—possible future
development paths—of the U.S. energy supply system from 2000 through 2035, and the increase in
carbon emissions under each scenario.
Pew’s analysis of one scenario in particular merits our attention. In “Technology Triumphs,” state policy
interventions, technology breakthroughs, and changing consumer preferences converge to accelerate
commercialization of high-efficiency, low-emission, and zero-emission energy technologies. In this
scenario, state governments:
•

•

Set “rigorous” efficiency standards for appliances, enact caps on CO2 emissions from power plants,
and introduce or expand renewable portfolio standards (policies requiring specified percentages of
electricity to come from wind, solar, and biomass technologies).
Enhance electric power generation and transmission efficiencies via tax preferences and other policies
promoting investment in “combined heat and power” (on-site electric generating units that harness
exhaust heat to support space and water heating, air conditioning, and various industrial processes)
and “distributed generation” (small-scale units located at or near customer sites that avoid energy
losses incident to long-range transmission).

  

121

•

Subsidize fuel cell research and effectively raise federal fuel economy standards by requiring new
cars, minivans, and light trucks to reduce emissions of CO2 per mile traveled.

These actions, combined with breakthroughs in solar photovoltaic manufacturing and a shift in consumer
preference from “sprawling” to compact residential development, slow the growth of vehicle miles
traveled, expand markets for hybrid cars, accelerate power sector fuel switching from coal to natural gas,
and lay the building blocks of a hydrogen economy.
“Technology Triumphs” is really a “Politics Triumphs” scenario with state governments implementing a
wide array of “technology forcing” schemes to “green” U.S. energy markets. These are the very types of
measures S&P advocate in their study and which Gore claims would create wealth while reducing
emissions.
But the Pew report inadvertently pours cold water on Gore’s Kyoto-without-tears assessment. In the
“Technology Triumphs” scenario, U.S. carbon emissions “rise 15 percent above the year 2000 levels by
2035”—about 35 percent above the U.S. Kyoto target—despite multi-state regulation of CO2 emissions
from vehicles and power plants, mature markets for hybrid cars, widespread efficiency upgrades in the
power sector, a successful launch of the hydrogen economy, and the proliferation of “energy smart”
communities and houses.
The Pew report concludes that, “In the absence of a mandatory [national] carbon cap, none of the base
case scenarios examined in this study achieves a reduction in U.S. carbon dioxide emissions by 2035
relative to current levels.” And it emphasizes, “This is true even in the scenario with the most optimistic
assumptions about the future cost and performance of energy technologies.” In other words, to reduce
emissions, it is necessary to force people to use less energy than they need—a lot less. That is a
prescription for recession and worse.
It is also unclear what environmental benefit the P&S program could accomplish. P&S aim at reducing
U.S. emissions to 1970 levels by 2054. But even if by some miracle global emissions fell to 1970 levels
tomorrow, carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere would continue to rise. Mankind would still be
emitting about 4.5 billion tons of carbon equivalent emissions annually.307
AIT never confronts the most obvious objection to regulatory climate policy. The main regulatory policies
debated in Congress today—the Kyoto Protocol, McCain-Lieberman,308 the Bingaman-Domenici
initiative309—would have no discernible impact on global warming. The Kyoto Protocol, for example,
would avert only 0.07°C of global warming by 2050.310 It would postpone the arrival of a 2°C warming
by six years—from 2094 to 2100. See the Figure below.

122

  

Kyoto postpones the arrival of a 2°C warming by six years—from 2094 to 2100
Source: Bjorn Lomborg 311

However, although Kyoto would have no measurable effect on global warming, it could cost the U.S.
economy tens to hundreds of billions of dollars in higher energy prices, lost jobs, and lower GDP.312 Alas,
the only proven “method” for making deep emission cuts is that of the former Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe: economic collapse. See the Figures below.

Of the six countries, only Russia’s emissions declined
Source: EIA 313

  

123

% CO2 Reductions 1990-2003

si
a
Sl
ov
ak
R
.
U
kr
ai
ne

us
R

Bu
lg
ar
ia
C
ze
ch
R
.
H
un
ga
ry
Po
la
nd
R
om
an
ia

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Former Communist Countries

Percent CO2 emission reductions of seven former communist countries, 1990-2003
Source: International Energy Agency data314

Regulatory climate policies are either all economic pain for no environmental gain or a “cure” worse than
the alleged disease.

124

  

XX. Morality

AIT: “We can’t afford inaction any longer, and frankly, there’s just no excuse for it. We
all want the same thing: for our children and the generations after them to inherit a clean
and beautiful planet capable of supporting a healthy human civilization. That goal should
transcend politics....This isn’t an ideological debate with two sides, pro and con. There is
only one Earth, and all of us who live on it share a common future.” (AIT, p. 287) “And
that is what is at stake. Our ability to live on Planet Earth—to have a future as a
civilization. I believe this is a moral issue.” (AIT, p. 298)
Comment: Nothing is more political than the claim to transcend politics, because anyone who actually
represents truth (science) and virtue (morality) deserves to rule. We are entitled to be wary of any
politician who, professing to be above partisanship and ideology, denies that his opponents have ideas
worth debating or motives worth respecting.
Gore never considers the obvious moral objection to his agenda—its potentially catastrophic impacts on
the world’s poor. Stabilizing atmospheric CO2 levels is not even remotely possible unless China, India,
and other developing countries restrict their use of carbon-based energy.315 Consequently, Kyoto
advocates view the treaty as just a “first step” in a series of carbon-suppression agreements, each more
stringent and/or inclusive than its predecessor.316 But the global economy is moving in exactly the
opposite direction. Demand for fossil energy is growing, especially in developing countries. For example,
the Energy Information Administration projects that global energy consumption will increase by 71%
between 2003 and 2030, with non-OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development)
countries accounting for three-quarters of the growth. In 2030, energy demand in non-OECD countries is
projected to exceed that in OECD countries by 34%. Fossil fuels account for the lion’s share of the
increase in consumption.317 See the Figures below.

Projected energy consumption growth from 2003 to 2030
Source: EIA

The inconvenient truth is that nobody knows how to meet current much less future global energy needs
with low- and non-emitting technologies.318

  

125

Energy poverty is a scourge, shortening the lives and impairing the health of untold millions of people
around the globe. An estimated 1.6 billion people lack access to electricity, and some 2.4 billion people
still rely on traditional biomass—wood, crop waste, and dung—for cooking and heating.319 Daily indoor
air pollution for these people is 3 to 37 times as dirtier than outdoor in the world’s most polluted cities,
and kills about 2.8 million people a year, most of them women and children.320 Reliance on traditional
biomass also takes a heavy toll on forests and wildlife habitat. The Figure below illustrates the energy
poverty that plagues much of the developing world.
Even in a wealthy country like the United States, energy taxes or their regulatory equivalent can inflict
hardship on low-income households.321 Millions of families already feel pinched by the high cost of
gasoline, natural gas, and home heating oil. A Kyoto-style system would push energy prices to even
higher levels.
Many U.S. politicians professed to be outraged in late 2005 when gasoline prices spiked above $3.00 a
gallon. Consumers pay twice as much for gasoline in some European countries, due to high motor fuel
taxes.322 See Figure below.
Yet from 1990 to 2004, EU transport sector CO2 emissions increased almost 26% and are projected under
current policies to be 35% above 1990 levels in 2010.324 How much higher than European-level gasoline
prices does Gore think Americans should have to pay in order to reduce U.S. emissions?
Gore should at least admit that the pursuit of carbon stabilization has the potential to do more harm than
good.
An Inconvenient Truth, Vice President Al Gore’s book on “The planetary emergency of global warming
and what can be done about it,” purports to be a non-ideological exposition of climate science and
common sense morality. As this commentary shows, AIT is a colorfully illustrated lawyer’s brief that uses
science selectively and often dubiously to advance an agenda of alarm and energy rationing.
Gore calls global warming a “moral issue,” but for him it is a moralizing issue—a license to castigate
political adversaries and blame America first for everything from hurricanes to floods to wildfires to tickborne disease. Somehow he sees nothing immoral in the attempt to make fossil energy scarcer and more
costly in a world where 1.6 billion people have never flipped a light switch and billions more are too poor
to own a car.
Nearly every significant statement that Vice President Gore makes regarding climate science and climate
policy is either one sided, misleading, exaggerated, speculative, or wrong. In light of these numerous
distortions, AIT is ill-suited to serve as a guide to climate science and climate policy for the American
people.
Never acknowledges the indispensable role of fossil fuels in alleviating hunger and poverty,
extending human life-spans, and democratizing consumer goods, literacy, leisure, and personal
mobility.
Never acknowledges the environmental, health, and economic benefits of climatic warmth and the
ongoing rise in the air’s CO2 content.
Never acknowledges the role of natural variability in shrinking the Snows of Kilimanjaro and other
mountain glaciers.
Never mentions the 1976 regime shift in the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO), potentially a major
cause of recent climate change in Alaska.
Presents a graph tracking CO2 levels and global temperatures during the past 650,000 years, but never
mentions the most significant point: global temperatures were warmer than the present during each of
the past four interglacial periods, even though CO2 levels were lower.
Neglects to mention that, due to the growth of urban heat islands, U.S. cities and towns will
continually break temperature records, with or without help from global warming.
Neglects to mention that global warming could reduce the severity of wintertime (frontal storms) by
decreasing the temperature differential between colliding air masses.
Highlights London’s construction of the Thames River flood barrier as evidence of global-warming
induced sea-level rise without mentioning that London is sinking two to six times faster than global
sea levels are rising.
Ignores the large role of natural variability in Arctic climate, never mentioning that Arctic
temperatures in the 1930s equaled or exceeded those of the late 20th century, and that the Arctic
during the early- to mid-Holocene was significantly warmer than it is today.
Cites a study’s finding that the number of recorded wildfires in North America has increased in recent
decades but not the same study’s finding that the total area burned decreased by 90% since the 1930s.
Fosters the impression that global warming can only be good for bad things (algae, ticks) and bad for
good things (polar bears, migratory birds)—nature re-imagined as a morality play.
Cites Velicogna and Wahr (2006), who found an overall loss in Antarctic ice mass during 2002-2005,
but ignores Davis et al. (2005), who found an overall ice mass gain during 1992-2003.
Cites Turner et al. (2006), who found a 0.5°C to 0.7°C per decade wintertime warming trend in the
mid-troposphere above Antarctica, as measured by weather balloons, but neglects to mention that
Turner et al. found much less warming—about 0.15°C/decade—at the Antarctic surface, and that
NASA satellites, which also measure troposphere temperatures, show a 0.12°C/decade Antarctic
cooling trend since November 1978.
Shows a picture of a garbage-strewn refuse dump in Mexico City to illustrate the “collision between
our civilization and the Earth”—as if blight and swill were the hallmarks of industrial civilization.
Sees “success” in the reduction of global population birth and death rates, but not in the fossil-energybased civilization that has enabled mankind to increase its numbers more than six-fold since the dawn
of the industrial revolution.
Compares Haiti (deforestation) and the Dominican Republic (lush forest cover) to illustrate the
impact of politics on the environment, but overlooks another key implication of the comparison:
Poverty is the environment’s number one enemy.
Notes that “much forest destruction” and “almost 30%” of annual CO2 emissions come from “the
burning of brushland for subsistence agriculture and wood fires used for cooking,” but never considers whether fossil energy restrictions would set back developing countries both economically and environmentally.
Neglects to mention the circumstances that make it reasonable rather than blameworthy for America
to be the biggest CO2 emitter: the world’s largest economy, abundant fossil energy resources, markets
integrated across continental distances, and the world’s most highly mobile population.
Impugns the motives of so-called global warming skeptics but never acknowledges the specialinterest motivations of those whose research grants, direct mail income, industrial policy privileges,
carbon trading commissions, regulatory power, prosecutorial plunder, or political careers depend on
keeping the public in a state of fear about global warming.
Castigates former White House official Phil Cooney for editing U.S. Government climate change
policy documents, without ever considering the scientific merits of Cooney’s editing.
Waxes enthusiastic about cellulosic ethanol, a product with no commercial application despite 30
years of government-funded research, and neglects to mention that corn-based ethanol, a product in
commercial use for a century, was still more costly than regular gasoline even when oil prices
exceeded $70 a barrel.
Blames Detroit’s financial troubles on the Big Three’s high-volume production of SUVs—even
though U.S. automakers probably would not even exist today had they emphasized ‘climate-friendly’
vehicles in the 1990s—and never mentions the staggering payments U.S. auto companies must make
for employee benefit packages negotiated decades ago.
Touts Denmark’s wind farms without mentioning any of the well-known drawbacks of wind power:
cost, intermittency, avian mortality, site depletion, and scenic degradation.
Never addresses the obvious criticism that the Kyoto Protocol is all pain for no gain and that policies
tough enough to measurably cool the planet would be a “cure” worse than the alleged disease.
Touts a study by Robert Socolow and Stephen Pacala (S&P), which allegedly demonstrates that
existing technologies could reduce CO2 emissions to 1970 levels, without mentioning that S&P is a
response to Hoffert et al. (2002), a team of 18 energy experts, who concluded that, “CO2 is a
combustion product vital to how civilization is powered; it cannot be regulated away.”
Implies that a two-page photograph of Perito Moreno Glacier in Argentina shows that the glacier is
melting away, even though the glacier’s terminal boundary has not changed in 90 years.
Implies that, throughout the past 650,000 years, changes in CO2 levels preceded and largely caused
changes in global temperature, whereas the causality mostly runs the other way, with CO2 changes
trailing global temperature changes by hundreds to thousands of years.
Belittles as ideologically motivated the painstaking and now widely-accepted methodological
critiques by Canadians Steve McIntyre and Ross McKitrick of the Hockey Stick reconstruction of
Northern Hemisphere climate history.
Distracts readers from the main hurricane problem facing the United States: the ever-growing,
politically-subsidized concentration of population and wealth in vulnerable coastal regions.
Ignores the societal factors that typically overwhelm climatic factors in determining people’s risk of
damage or death from hurricanes, floods, drought, tornadoes, wildfires, and disease.
Implies that the 2006 tropical cyclone season in Australia was unusually active and, thus,
symptomatic of global warming. In contrast, NOAA describes the season as “near average.”
Cites increases in insurance payments to victims of hurricanes, floods, drought, tornadoes, wildfires,
and other natural disasters as evidence of a global-warming ravaged planet, even though the increases
are chiefly due to socioeconomic factors such as population growth and development in high risk
coastal areas and cities.
Re-labels as “major floods” (a category defined by physical magnitude) a chart of “damaging floods”
(a category defined by socioeconomic and political criteria), inflating the importance of climate
change as a factor in flood risk.
Re-labels as “major wildfires” (a category defined by physical magnitude) a chart of “recorded
wildfires” (a category reflecting changes in data collection and reporting), inflating the importance of
climate change as a factor in fire risk.
Conflates the oceanic Thermohaline Circulation (THC), a convective system primarily driven by
differences in salinity and sea temperatures, with the Gulf Stream, a wind-driven system energized
primarily by the Earth’s spin and the lunar tides, exaggerating the risk of a big chill in Europe from a
weakening of the THC.
Presents a graph showing the number of annual closings of the Thames River tidal barriers from 1930
to the present, even though the modern barrier system became operational in 1983. This apples-tooranges comparison conveys the false impression that London faced no serious flood risk until recent
decades.
Blames global warming for the increase of “invasive alien species” in Switzerland, never mentioning
that the species in question were ‘exotic’ trees and shrubs deliberately introduced into Swiss parks
and gardens as long as 200 years ago.
Blames global warming for the decline “since the 1960s” of the Emperor Penguin population in
Antarctica, implying that the penguins are in peril, their numbers dwindling as the world warms. In
fact, the population declined in the 1970s and has been stable since the late 1980s.
Implies that a study, which found that none of 928 science articles (actually abstracts) disputed that
IPCC’s conclusion that rising greenhouse gas levels likely caused most of the warming of the past 50
years, shows that Gore’s apocalyptic view of global warming is the “consensus” view among climate
scientists.
Reports that 48 Nobel Prize-winning scientists accused Bush of distorting science, without
mentioning that the scientists acted as members of a 527 political group set up to promote the Kerry
for President Campaign.
Misrepresents the auto companies’ position in their lawsuit to overturn California’s CO2 emissions
law, neglecting to mention that CO2 standards are de facto fuel economy standards and that federal
law prohibits states from regulating fuel economy.
Confuses fuel efficiency (the amount of useful work per unit of fuel consumed) with fuel economy
(miles per gallon), falsely portraying U.S. cars and trucks as inefficient compared to their European
and Japanese counterparts.
Exaggerates the certainty and hypes the importance of the alleged link between global warming and
the frequency and severity of tropical storms.
Hypes the importance of NOAA running out of names (21 per year) for Atlantic tropical storms in
2005, and the fact that some storms continued into December. The practice of naming storms only
goes back to 1953, and storm detection capabilities have improved dramatically since the 1950s, so
the “record” number of named storms in 2005 may be an artifact of the data. Also, Atlantic storms
continued into December in several previous years including 1878, 1887, and 1888.
Never explains why anyone should be alarmed about the current Arctic warming, considering that our
stone-age ancestors survived (and likely benefited from) the much stronger and longer Arctic
warming during the Holocene Climate Optimum.
Portrays the cracking of the Ward Hunt ice shelf in 2002 as a portent of doom, even though the shelf
was merely a remnant of a much larger Arctic ice formation that had already lost 90% of its area
during 1906-1982.
Claims polar bears “have been drowning in significant numbers,” based on a report that found four
drowned polar bears in one month in one year, following an abrupt storm.
Claims global warming is creating “ecological niches” for “invasive alien species,” never mentioning
other, more important factors such as increases in trade, tourism, and urban heat islands. For example,
due to population growth, Berlin warmed twice as much during 1886-1898 as the IPCC estimates the
entire world warmed in the 20th century.
Blames global warming for pine beetle infestations that likely have more to do with increased forest
density and plain old mismanagement.
Portrays the collapse in 2002 of the Larson-B ice shelf—a formation the “size of Rhode Island”—as
harbinger of doom. For perspective, the Larson-B was 180th the size of Texas and 1/246th the size of
the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS).
Warns that the break-off of floating ice shelves like Larson B accelerates the flow of land-based ice
behind them. However, researchers found that the speedup was not observable beyond about 10 km
inland, and that decelerations occurred only one year later.
Presents a graph suggesting that China’s new fuel economy standards are almost 30% more stringent
than the current U.S. standards. According to the World Resources Institute, the Chinese standards
are only about 5% more stringent.
Warns of impending water shortages in Asia due to global warming but does not check whether there
is any correlation between global warming and Eurasian snow cover (there isn’t). Also, if Tibetan
glaciers melt, that should increase water availability in the coming decades.
Claims that CO2 concentrations in the Holocene never rose above 300 ppm in pre-industrial times,
and that the current level (380 ppm) is “way above” the range of natural variability. A study of leaf
stoma remains indicates that, in the early Holocene, CO2 levels exceeded 330 ppm for centuries and
reached 348 ppm—roughly the CO2 level in 1987.
Claims that a Scripps Oceanography Institute study shows that ocean temperatures during the past 40
years are “way above the range of natural variability.” Proxy data indicate that the Atlantic Ocean off
the West Coast of Africa and the Bermuda Rise was warmer than present during the Medieval Warm
Period.
Blames global warming for the record number of typhoons hitting Japan in 2004. Local
meteorological conditions, not average global temperatures, determine the trajectory of particular
storms, and data going back to 1950 show a greater number of tropical cyclones in the Western North
Pacific during the late 1960s and early 1970s than in recent decades.
Blames global warming for the record-breaking 37-inch downpour in Mumbai, India, in July 2005,
even though there has been no trend in Mumbai rainfall for the month of July in 45 years.
Blames global warming for recent floods in China’s Sichuan and Shandong provinces, even though
far more damaging floods struck those areas in the 19th and early 20th centuries.
Blames global warming for the disappearance of Lake Chad, a disaster more likely stemming from a
combination of regional climate variability and societal factors such as overgrazing.
Claims global warming is drying out soils all over the world, whereas pan evaporation studies
indicate that, in general, the Earth’s surface is becoming wetter.
Presents one climate model’s projection of increased U.S. drought as authoritative even though
another leading model forecasts increased wetness, and most of the United States (outside the
Southwest) became wetter during 1925-2003.
Blames global warming for the severe drought that hit the Amazon in 2005. RealClimate.Org, a web
site set up to debunk global warming “skeptics,” concluded that it is not possible to link the drought
to global warming.
Warns of a positive feedback whereby CO2-induced warming melts tundra, releasing more CO2
locked up in frozen soils. An alternative scenario is also plausible: The range of carbon-storing
vegetation expands as tundra thaws.
Claims global warming endangers polar bears even though polar bear populations are increasing in
Arctic areas where it is warming and declining in Arctic areas where it is cooling.
Blames global warming for Alaska’s “drunken trees” (trees rooted in previously frozen tundra, which
sway in all directions as the ice melts), ignoring the possibly large role of the 1976 PDO shift.
Blames rising CO2 levels for recent declines in Arctic sea ice, ignoring the potentially large role of
natural variability. AIT never mentions that wind pattern shifts may account for much of the observed
changes in sea ice, or that the Canadian Arctic Archipelago had considerably less sea ice during the
early Holocene.
Warns that meltwater from Greenland could disrupt the Atlantic thermohaline circulation based on
research indicating that a major disruption occurred 10,000 years ago when a giant ice dam burst in
North America, allowing two lakes to drain rapidly into the sea. AIT does not mention that the lakes
injected more than 100,000 cubic kilometers of freshwater into the sea, whereas Greenland ice melt
contributes a few hundred cubic kilometers a year.
Claims global warming is “disrupting millions of delicately balanced ecological relationships among
species” based on a study showing that, in the Netherlands, caterpillars are hatching two weeks earlier
than the peak arrival season of caterpillar-eating migratory birds. AIT claims the birds’ “chicks are in
trouble,” yet the researcher found “no demonstrable effect” on the bird population during the past 20
years.
Warns that global warming is destroying coral reefs, even though today’s main reef builders evolved
and thrived during periods substantially warmer than the present.
Warns that a doubling of pre-industrial CO2 levels to 560 ppm will so acidify seawater that all
optimal areas for coral reef construction will disappear by 2050. This is not plausible. Coral
calcification rates have increased as ocean temperatures and CO2 levels have risen, and today’s main
reef builders evolved and thrived during the Mesozoic Period, when atmospheric CO2 levels were five
times current concentrations for millions of years.
Links global warming to toxic algae bloom outbreaks in the Baltic Sea that can be entirely explained
by record-high phosphorus levels, record-low nitrogen-to-phosphorus levels, and local meteorological
conditions.
Asserts without evidence that global warming is causing more tick-borne disease (TBD). An Oxford
University study found no relationship between climate change and TBD in Europe.
Blames global warming for recent malaria outbreaks in Kenya, even though malaria was common in
Nairobi in the 1920s-1940s, and several studies attribute the current problem to decreased spraying of
homes with DDT, anti-malarial drug resistance, and incompetent public health programs.
Insinuates that global warming is a factor in the emergence of some 30 “new” diseases over the last
three decades, but cites no supporting research or evidence.
Blames global warming for the decline “since the 1960s” of the Emperor Penguin population in
Antarctica based on speculation that warm sea temperatures in the 1970s reduced the birds’ main food
source. An equally plausible explanation is that Antarctic ecotourism, which became popular in the
1970s, disturbed the rookeries.
Cites the growing number of Thames River barrier closings as evidence of global warming-induced
sea level rise, even though UK authorities close the barriers to keep water in as well as to keep tidal
surges out.
Warns of “significant and alarming structural changes” in the submarine base of West Antarctic Ice
Sheet (WAIS), but does not tell us what those changes are or why they are “significant and alarming.”
The melting and retreat of the WAIS “grounding line” has been going on since the early Holocene. At
the rate of retreat observed in the 1990s, the WAIS should disappear in about 7,000 years.
Warns that vertical water tunnels (“moulins”) are lubricating the Greenland Ice Sheet, increasing the
risk that it will “slide” into the sea. Summertime glacier flow acceleration associated with moulins is
tiny. Moulins in numbers equal to or surpassing those observed today probably occurred in the first
half of the 20th century, when Greenland was as warm as or warmer than the past decade, with no
major loss of grounded ice.
Presents 10 pages of before-and-after “photographs” showing what 20 feet of sea level rise would do
to the world’s major coastal communities. There is no credible evidence of an impending collapse of
the great ice sheets. We do have fairly good data on ice mass balance changes and their effects on sea
level. Zwally et al. (2005) found a combined Greenland/Antarctica ice-loss-sea-level-rise equivalent
of 0.05 mm per year during 1992-2002. At that rate, it would take a full millennium to raise sea level
by just 5 cm.
Forecasts an increase in U.S. renewable energy production during 1990-2030 more than twice that
projected by the U.S. Energy Information Administration.
Presents as glaciologist Lonnie Thompson’s reconstruction of tropical climate history a graph that is
in fact the “Hockey Stick” reconstruction of Northern Hemisphere climate history.
Claims Thompson’s reconstruction of climate history proves the Medieval Warm Period was “tiny”
compared to the warming observed in recent decades. It doesn’t. Four of Thompson’s six ice cores
indicate that several decades of the Medieval Warm Period were as warm as or warmer than any
recent decade.
Calls carbon dioxide the “most important greenhouse gas.” Water vapor is the leading contributor to
the greenhouse effect.
Claims Venus is too hot and Mars too cold to support life due to differences in atmospheric CO2
concentrations (they are nearly identical), rather than differences in atmospheric densities and
distances from the Sun (both huge).
Claims scientists have validated the “Hockey Stick” climate reconstruction, according to which the
1990s were likely the warmest decade of the past millennium and 1998 the warmest year. It is now
widely acknowledged that the Hockey Stick was built on a flawed methodology and inappropriate
data. Scientists continue to debate whether the Medieval Warm period was warmer than recent
decades.
Assumes that CO2 levels are increasing at roughly 1 percent annually. The actual rate is half that.
Assumes a linear relationship between CO2 levels and global temperatures, whereas the actual CO2warming effect is logarithmic, meaning that the next 100-ppm increase adds less heat than the
previous 100-ppm increase.
Claims the rate of global warming is accelerating, whereas the rate has been constant for the past 30
years—roughly 0.17°C/decade.
Blames global warming for Europe’s killer heat wave of 2003—an event caused by an atmospheric
circulation anomaly.
Blames global warming for Hurricane Catarina, the first South Atlantic hurricane on record, which
struck Brazil in 2004. Catarina formed not because the South Atlantic was unusually warm (sea
temperatures were cooler than normal), but because the air was so much colder it produced the same
kind of heat flux from the ocean that fuels hurricanes in warmer waters.
Claims that 2004 set an all-time record for the number of tornadoes in the United States. Tornado
frequency has not increased; rather, the detection of smaller tornadoes has increased. If we consider
the tornadoes that have been detectable for many decades (F-3 or greater), there is actually a
downward trend since 1950.
Blames global warming for a “mass extinction crisis” that is not, in fact, occurring.
Blames global warming for the rapid coast-to-coast spread of the West Nile virus. North America
contains nearly all the climate types in the world—from hot, dry deserts to boreal forests, to frigid
tundra—a range that dwarfs any small alteration in temperature or precipitation that may be related to
atmospheric CO2 levels. The virus could not have spread so far so fast, if it were climate-sensitive.
Cites Tuvalu, Polynesia, as a place where rising sea levels force residents to evacuate their homes. In
reality, sea levels at Tuvalu fell during the latter half of the 20th century and even during the 1990s,
allegedly the warmest decade of the millennium.
Claims sea level rise could be many times larger and more rapid “depending on the choices we make
or do not make now” concerning global warming. Not so. The most aggressive choice America could
make now would be to join Europe in implementing the Kyoto Protocol. A leading climate modeler
estimates the treaty would avert only 1 cm of sea level rise by 2050 and 2.5 cm by 2100.
Accuses Exxon Mobil of running a “disinformation campaign” designed to “reposition global
warming as theory, rather than fact,” even though two clicks of the mouse reveal that Exxon Mobil
acknowledges global warming as a fact.
Claims Bush hired Phil Cooney to “be in charge” of White House environmental policy. This must be
a surprise to White House Council on Environmental Quality Chairman James Connaughton, who
hired Cooney and was his boss at the CEQ.
Claims the European Union’s emission trading system (ETS) is working “effectively.” In fact, the
ETS is not reducing emissions and operates as a wealth transfer scheme.
Claims U.S. firms won’t be able to sell American-made cars in China because Beijing has set higher
fuel economy standards. This is equivalent to saying U.S. firms won’t be able to sell cars in India
until all U.S.-made cars are built to drive on the left side of the road.
